# History

## The Classical Era

It is reasonable to say that particle physics was born in 1887 with J. J. Thomson's discovery of the electron. Thomson knew that cathode rays emitted by a hot filament could be deflected by a magnet. This suggested that said rays carried electric charge, and, given the path of deflection, it further suggested that they carried *negative* charge. Therefore, it seemed that these rays were not rays at all, but rather streams of particles. By passing the beam that crossed electric and magnetic fields and adjusting the field strength until the net reflection was zero, Thomson was able to determine the speed of the particles as well as their mass-to-charge ratio. This ratio returned out to be enormously greater than for any known ion, indicating that either the charge was really large, or the particles were really small. We know the latter is true now,  and indirect evidence pointed towards that being the case.

Thomson correctly surmised that electrons where essential components of atoms; however, we know that atoms are electrically neutral, so the problem arose of how to compensate for the positive charge, as well as the bulk of the mass. Thomson himself imagined the electrons suspended in a heavy, positively charged paste, like the plums in a pudding. This was quickly disproven by Rutherford's famous experiment, which showed that the atom was composed of a tiny core, while the electrons orbited around it. This also showed that atoms were mostly empty space.

The nucleus of the lightest atom hydrogen was given the name *proton* by Rutherford. In 1914, Niels Bohr proposed a model for hydrogen consisting of a single electron circling the proton, rather like a planet going around the Sun, held together by the attractive nature of opposite charges. It followed then, that the other atoms were much the same, but the next heavier atom already posed a problem, as it had two electrons and two protons, but weighed *four times* as much as hydrogen, and the next element after that weighed *seven times* as much. This was resolved by Chadwick's discovery of the neutron — an electrically neutral twin to the proton. As such, the helium nucleus actually contained two protons and two neutrons. In fact, one can put many neutrons into the nucleus of an atom and retain its properties which then showed the existence of isotopes. This had finally answered the question "What is matter made of?" In 1932, it was all protons, electrons, and neutrons. But already the seeds were planted for the three great ideas that would dominate the *middle period* of particle physics: Yukawa's meson, Dirac's positron, and Pauli's neutrino. Before we get there however, we should back up and talk about the photon.