# What is a Curve?

The first part of this course will be dedicated to he answering this question. We should view these objects as embedded in a space.

The second part of this course will be very similar, except with surfaces instead.

The last part of this course will be developing the idea of Riemannian manifolds

##  Review

$$f:\; I \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$

Where $I$ is just some interval. We now define $U \subseteq \mathbb{R}$ to be open if$\forall x \in U \exists \delta> 0\; \text{such that} (x-\delta, x+\delta)$ ...

If $\varnothing \neq A \subseteq \mathbb{R}$, then $\sup A$ is the least upper bound.

$S = \sup A \Leftrightarrow S\geq a \forall a\in A,\quad t\geq a \forall a \in A \Rightarrow S\leq t.$ 

Every bounded above set in $\mathbb{R}$ has a supremum.

**Taylor's Theorem**: The usual Taylor expansion.

**Calculus in $\mathbb{R}^{n}$** :$$||v||= \sqrt{v \cdot v}= \sqrt{v_{1}^{2}...v_{n}^{2}}$$

This is linear but squares have some funny business. For technical purposes, we can use other norms, as they are all equivalent. The proof is simple, but we take it as an axiom here. We will mostly use the first Euclidean norm, but would could require others.

The analog of this is

$$B_{R}(v):= \{w \in \mathbb{R}^{n}|\;||w-v||<R\}$$

This is the open Euclidean ball. We about may also use the weaker closed ball where would include the boundaries. Because all norms are equivalent, we can use any of them as we please. The empty set as well as $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ are open. If $U$ and $V$ are open, $U \cap V$ is also open. Arbitrary unions of open sets are open, but infinitely many unions may not be open in general. Same applies to closed complements.

If $f$ is a map from $U \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{m}$, where $U$ is a subset of $\mathbb{R}^{n}$, then $f$ is continuous for all $W\subseteq \mathbb{R}^m$ is open, and $f^{-1}(W)$ is open in $U$.

f is differentiable at $p$ if...