#  Curves in the Plane and in Space

This first chapter discusses two mathematical formulations of the intuitive notion of what a curve is. These two formulations have a subtle relation between them, so we start by providing some examples first.

# What is a Curve?

If you were asked to provide an example of a curve, you might give something like a straight line, say, $y-2x= 1$ (which isn't even really "curved"), or a circle, like $x^{2}+ y^{2}= 1$, or  a parabola, $y-x^{2}= 0$.

All of these curves are described by their Cartesian equation

$$f (x)= c,$$

Where $f$ is a function of $x$ and $y$, and $c$ is a constant. From this point of view, we can think of a curve as a set of points, namely

$$\mathcal{C}= \{(x, y) \in \mathbb{R}^{2}|\; f (x, y) = c\}$$

the above examples were all in $\mathbb{R}^{2}$, but we can also do this with curves in $\mathbb{R}^{3}$— for example, the $x-$axis is the straight line given by

$$y = 0, \quad z = 0,$$

And more generally a curve in $\mathbb{R}^{3}$ might be defined by a pair of equations

$$f_{1}(x, y, z)= c_{1}, \quad f_{2}(x, y, z)= c_{2}.$$

These curves are called *level curves*, the idea being that the curve is the set of points $(x, y)$ in the plane at which the quantity $f (x, y)$ reaches the "level" $c$.

There is another way to think about customers curves which turns out to be more useful in many situations. For this, a curve is viewed as the path traced out by a moving point. E.g.. $\gamma (t)$ is the position of the point at time $t$, the curve is described by a function $\gamma$ with parameter $t$, with vector values. We use this idea to write our first formal definition of a curve in $\mathbb{R}^{n}$.

## Parameterized Curves

A *parameterized curve* in $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ is a map $\gamma:(\alpha, \beta)\rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{n}$, for some $\alpha, \beta$ with $-\infty \leq \alpha < \beta \leq \infty$.

The symbol $(\alpha, \beta)$ denotes the open interval

$$(\alpha, \beta)= \{t \in \mathbb{R}|\; \alpha < \beta\}.$$

A parameterized curve whose image is contained in a level curve $\mathcal{C}$, is called a *parameterization* of (part of) $\mathcal{C}$. Let's do some examples to illustrate how to go from one formulation to another:

## Example 1

Find a parameterization $\gamma (t)$, of the parabola $y = x^{2}$.

If $\gamma (t)= (\gamma_{1}(t), \gamma_{2}(t))$, the components $\gamma_{1}$ and $\gamma_{2}$ must satisfy
 $$\gamma_{2}(t)= \gamma_{1}(t^{2})$$

For all values of $t$ on the interval $(\alpha, \beta)$ where $\gamma$ is defined, and ideally every point on the parabola should be equal to $(\gamma_{1}(t), \gamma_{2}(t))$ for some $t \in (\alpha, \beta)$. The most obvious solution of course is to take $\gamma_{1}(t)= t$ and $\gamma_{2}(t)= t^{2}$. To get every point on the parabola we allow $t$ to take every real number value, so we take $(\alpha, \beta)$ to be $(-\infty, \infty)$. Thus, the desired parameterization is

$$\gamma:(-\infty, \infty)\rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{2}, \quad \gamma (t)= (t, t^{2}).$$

It should be abundantly clear that this is not the only parameterization of $y = x^{2}$; we could have just as well chosen $\gamma (t)= (t^{3}, t^{6})$. Yet another is $(2t, 4t^{2})$. In fact there are infinitely many possible parameterizations for a given level curve.

## Example 2

Now we try the circle $x^{2}+ y^{2}= 1$. One might initially be tempted to take  $x = t$ as in the previous example so we get the parameterization

$$\gamma (t)= (t, \sqrt{1-t^{2}}).$$

But that only gets us the top half of the circle, since $\sqrt{1-t^{2}}\geq 0\forall\; t$. In this case, the parameterization must satisfy

$$\gamma_{1}(t)^{2}+ \gamma_{2}(t)^{2}= 1$$

For all $t \in (\alpha, \beta)$. After some thought, you should have come up with a rather simple parameterization for this problem: $\gamma_{1}(t)= \cos t, \; \gamma_{2}(t)= \sin t$. This works because $\cos^{2}t + \sin^{2}t = 1 \; \forall \; t$. Notice that we don't need $(\alpha, \beta)= (-\infty, \infty)$; any open interval whose length is greater than $2 \pi$ will suffice.

This next example shows how to go the other way around.

## Example 3

Take the parameterized curve (called an *astroid*) and express it as a level curve.

$$\gamma (t)= (\cos^{3}t, \sin^{3}t), \quad t \in \; \mathbb{R}.$$

Since we know $\cos^{2}t + \sin^{2}t = 1$ for all $t$, the coordinates $x = \cos^{3}t, \;y= \sin^{3}t$ satisfy

$$x^{2/3}+ y^{2/3}= 1.$$

You can check for yourself that this level curve coincides with the parameterized curve we started with.

Throughout the course we will be studying parameterized curves using methods of calculus. These curves (and later surfaces) will be almost exclusively expressed in terms of *smooth* functions. You should know what these are, you but anyways: a function $f:(\alpha, \beta)\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ is said to be smooth if the derivative $\frac{d^{n}f}{dt^{n}}$ exists for all $n \geq 1$ and all $t \in (\alpha, \beta)$. If $f$ and $g$ are smooth functions, their sum, product, quotient, and composite are smooth functions as well. This follows from the is standard results of calculus.

To differentiate a *vector-valued* function such as $\gamma (t)$, we simply differentiate term-by-term.

	From now on, all parameterized curves will be assumed to be smooth.

## Tangent Vectors

If $\gamma$ is a parameterized curve, its first derivative $\dot{\gamma}(t)$ is called the *tangent vector* of $\gamma$at the point $\gamma (t)$.

### Proposition 1

If the tangent vector of parameterized curve is constant, the image of the curve is part of a straight line.

#### Proof

If $\dot{\gamma}(t)= \mathbf{a}\; \forall \; t$, where $\mathbf{a}$ a constant vector, we have, integrating component-wise,

$$\gamma (t)= \int \frac{d \gamma}{dt}dt = \int \mathbf{a}dt = t \mathbf{a}+ \mathbf{b},$$

Where $\mathbf{b}$ is another constant vector. If $\mathbf{a}\neq 0$, this is the parametric equation of the straight line parallel to $\mathbf{a}$ and passing through the point $\mathbf{b}$. If $\mathbf{a}= 0$, the image of $\gamma$ is a single point.

A potential source of confusion regarding parameterized curves regards the question: What is a "point" of such a curve? This is specially notable in curves that intersect themselves. We solve this problem by better defining the tangent vector. Its definition should read "If $\gamma$ is a parameterized curve, its first derivative is called the tangent vector of $\gamma$ at the parameter value $t$." In this way, a curve may self-intersect and still be able to consistently give the right tangent vector at the point of self-intersection.
