# Conservative and Non-conservative Forces

We start with a digression into Newtonian mechanics.

*Conservative forces:* Consider a particle the position $\mathbf{x}= (x, y, z)$ with potential energy $V (\mathbf{x})$. The force acting in the particle $\mathbf{x}$. Is

$$
\begin{align}
\mathbf{F}(\mathbf{x})=-\nabla V (\mathbf{x})= 
\begin{pmatrix} -\partial_{x}V (\mathbf{x}) \\ -\partial_{y}V (\mathbf{x}) \\ -\partial_{z}V (\mathbf{x}) \\ \end{pmatrix}.
\end{align}
$$

For example, Earth's gravitational field is $V_{gr}(\mathbf{x})= m_0gz$, with $m_0$ the mass of the particle, and

$$
\begin{align}
\mathbf{F}_{gr} (\mathbf{x})=
\begin{pmatrix}0 \\ 0 \\ -m_{0g}\end{pmatrix}.
\end{align}
$$

Gravitational force is an example of a *conservative force,* because it can be written is the gradient of some potential function $-V (\mathbf{x})$. Note that $\mathbf{F}= \mathbf{0}$ is also a conservative force.

*Mechanical work:* We say that $\mathbf{F}(\mathbf{x})$ is a force field, as it specifies the force on a particle at position $\mathbf{x}$. In order to move a particle from $\mathbf{x}$ to $\mathbf{x}+ d \mathbf{x}$ in a force field $\mathbf{F}(\mathbf{x})$, we need to perform the amount of work

$$dW = \mathbf{F}(\mathbf{x})\cdot d \mathbf{x}.$$

This work could be supplied, for instance, mechanically (say, with our muscles) or electrically. To bring the particle from position $\mathbf{x}_{A}$ to $\mathbf{x}_{B}$, we can divide the path into $K$ sufficiently small steps and sum them up. We can then make the steps infinitesimal and write

$$W = \int_{\mathbf{x}_{A}}^{\mathbf{x}_{B}}dW = \int_{\mathbf{x}_{A}}^{\mathbf{x}_{B}}\mathbf{F}(\mathbf{x})\cdot d \mathbf{x}.$$ 

- Given two points $\mathbf{x}_{A}$ and $\mathbf{x}_{B}$, there are many possible ways to get from one to the other. Each such way corresponds to a different choice of sufficiently small steps,  and hence, in principle to a different outcome of the summation that gives $W$. The value of $W$generally depends on the path we take from $\mathbf{x}_{A}$ to $\mathbf{x}_{B}$.
- The work $$\int_{\mathbf{x}_{A}}^{\mathbf{x}_{B}}\mathbf{F}(\mathbf x)\cdot d \mathbf{x}$$ is independent of the path if and only if $\mathbf{F}(\mathbf{x})$ is a conservative force.

 *Non-conservative forces:* Typical examples of non conservative forces are friction, water drag, or air drag. They cannot be written is the gradient of any function. For instance, A friction force acting on a particle may have the form

$$\mathbf{F}(\mathbf{x}, \dot{\mathbf{x}})= \eta\dot{\mathbf{x}}$$

With some friction coefficient $\eta$.

*Conservation of energy:* A mechanical system is called  *conservative* if all forces acting on it are conservative forces. The total energy is then the sum of the kinetic and potential energy of all the particles at any given time. It is determined by the dynamical state. The settle energy of a conservative system is conserved.

Systems that feature non-conservative forces are called *dissipative*. Energy is still conserved, but only for the total system including its environment. Mechanically, the heat that is created through friction corresponds to disordered motion of particles. This case is captured by the first law of thermodynamics. 