# Energy and Heat

The first law of thermodynamics is essentially the statement of the principle of conservation of energy for thermodynamical systems. It may be expressed by stating that the variation in energy of a system during any transformation is equal to the amount of energy that the system receives from its environment.

Consider first a conservative mechanical system of $N$ particles. The system energy is the sum of the potential and the kinetic energy, hence a function of the dynamical state. Assume $A$ and $B$ are two successive states of an isolated system with energies $E_A$ and $E_B$. If no external forces act on the system, energy remains constant, and

$$E_{B}=E_{A}$$

When external forces act in the system, this equality need no longer hold. If $W$ is the work performed by the external forces during a transformation from $A$ to $B$, then the conservation of energy implies

$$E_{B}= E_{A}+ W.$$

Importantly, the work done during the transformation only depends on the initial and final states $A$ and $B$, and not on the particular way in which the transformation from $A$ to $B$ is performed. This is he only true for conservative systems.

**Conservative Systems:** The work $W = W_{A\rightarrow B}$  in

$$E_{B}= E_{A}+ W$$

Only depends on the initial and final thermodynamic states. Assume that we find this property contradicted by an experiment performed on awe particular thermodynamic system. If we do not wish to discard the principle of conservation of energy, then we must admit the existence of other methods, besides mechanical work, by means of which energy can be exchanged between the system and the environment.

Imagine we find a system that contradicts this property. If we still wanted to keep the principle of conservation of energy, we must admit the existence of other methods by which energy dissipates into the environment. We can consider a specific example

**Example: Heating of Water**

Consider a system composed of a quantity of water of volume $V$ at atmospheric pressure $P$. We consider two states $A$ and $B$ of the system with temperatures $T_{A}$ and $T_{B}$ such that $T_{A}< T_{B}$. To a good approximation, these states have the system volume and pressure.

1. If we heat the water by placing it over a flame and rise its temperature from the initial value $T_{A}$ to its final value $T_{B}$. The work performed by the system during the transformation is zero, since the does not change its volume ; $V = 0$.
2.  We raise the temperature of the water from $T_{A}$ to $T_{B}$ by heating it through friction. We do this by submerging a set of paddles attached to a motor which spins the paddles. The temperature of the water will increase as long as the paddles continue to rotate. This is because the water offers resistance to the paddles, so we must perform positive work $(W > 0)$ in order to keep the paddles moving until $T_{B}$ is reached.

It is clear that the amount of work $W$ going from $A$ to $B$ depends on whether we go by means of the first or second way.

Assuming that the principle of conservation of energy holds for our system, then the energy transmitted to the water in the form of mechanical work of rotating paddles in the second way must be transmitted to the water in the first way in a non-mechanical form called *heat*. We are led to the fact that heat and mechanical work are actually different aspects of the same concept: Energy.

Pulling it all together, we get one of the most important concepts of this course, and perhaps even physics:

**The First Law of Thermodynamics:** We first enclose the system in a cylindrical container with a movable piston at one end. If the container walls are non-heat-conducting, then the system is thermally isolated, and the exchange of energy between the system and the environment can only occur in the form of mechanical work. The amount of work performed on the system, $W$, when going from state $A$ to $B$ only depends on the initial and final states of the transformation. Then, the work satisfies

$$
\Delta E = W .
$$

If our system is not thermally isolated, this is generally not true, because there can be an exchange of energy between the system and the environment in the form of heat. We then write the more general equation

$$
\begin{align}
\Delta E &+ L = Q, \; \text{or}\\
\Delta E &= W + Q,
\end{align}
$$

where $Q$ is equal to zero for transformations performed on thermally insulated systems and otherwise, in general, is different from zero.

In other words, the heat $Q$ can be interpreted as the amount of energy that is received by the system in forms other than work. The first law of thermodynamics is a precise formulation of the equivalence of heat and work.

The work $W$ appearing in the first law could also be electric are magnetic work, but we will mostly be dealing with situations where $W$ is mechanical work.

For a cyclic transformation, the first law takes on a very simple form, since the initial and final states are the same, we have $\Delta E = 0$, thus

$$
L = Q.
$$

That is, the work done by a system during a cyclic transformation is equal are the heat absorbed by the system.

The SI unit for energy is the Joule,

$$
\begin{align}
1J= 1Nm = \frac{kgm^2}{s^2}.
\end{align}
$$

In the cgs system, the unit of energy is

$$
\begin{align}
1 erg = 1 \frac{gcm^{2}}{s^{2}}=10^{-7}J.
\end{align}
$$

In terms of power consumption, energy is measured in $kWh$, with

$$
1kWh = 10^{3}J/s \times 3600s = 3.6 \cdot 10^{6}J = 3.6MJ.
$$

Where $W$ is the Watt, which is $1J/s$.

Yet another unit used is the calorie, which is the amount of energy required to heat 1 gram of water at standard atmospheric pressure by $1^{\circ}C$.

$$
1 cal = 4.2J
$$