# Heat Capacity and the Calorimeter

Consider a system described by the variables $(V, P, T)$. An infinitesimal transformation is a transformation for which the two independent variables change by infinitesimal amounts. The first law of thermodynamics for this transformation reads

$$
dE = dW + dQ =-PdV + dQ
$$

If we choose $T$ and $V$ as independent variables, $E$ changes according to

$$
dE = \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial T}\right)_{V}dT + \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial V}\right)_{T}dV.
$$

Inserted into the first law, this yields

$$
\left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial T}\right)_{V}dT + \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial V}\right)_{T}dV =-PdV + dQ,
$$

or

$$
(I) \;dQ = \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial T}\right)_{V}dT + \left[\left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial V}\right)_{T}+ P \right] dV.
$$

Similarly, taking $T$ and $P$ as independent variables we generally have

$$
\begin{align}
dE & = \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial T}\right)_{P}dT + \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial P}\right)_{T}dP, \\
dV & = \left(\frac{\partial V}{\partial T}\right)_{P}dT + \left(\frac{\partial V}{\partial P}\right)_{T}dP
\end{align}
$$

which, together with the fester law, yields

$$
\begin{align}
(II)\; dQ & = \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial T}\right)_{P}dT + \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial T}\right)_{T}dP + PdV \\
& = \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial T}\right)_{P}dT + \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial P}\right)_{T}dP + P \left[\left(\frac{\partial V}{\partial T}\right)_{P}dT + \left(\frac{\partial V}{\partial P}\right)_{T}dP \right] \\
& = \left[\left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial T}\right)_{P}+ P \left(\frac{\partial V}{\partial T}\right)_{P}\right] dT + \left[\left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial P}\right)_{T}+ P \left(\frac{\partial V}{\partial P}_{T} \right)\right] dP.
\end{align}
$$

Finally, taking $V$ and $P$ is independent variables we obtain

$$
(III)\; dQ = \left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial P}\right)_{V}dP + \left[\left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial V}\right)_{P}+ P \right] dV.
$$

Again, note that all three expressions for $dQ$ are identical, just expressed in terms of different variables.

## Heat Capacity

The *heat capacity* $C$ of an body is defined as the ratio $C = \frac{dQ}{dT}$. The unit of $C$ is $k_{B}\propto J/K$. In general, the heat capacity of a body will be different according to whether the body is heated at constant volume or constant pressure. We denote this by a subscript according to

$$
\begin{align}
C_{V}& = \left(\frac{\partial Q}{\partial T}\right)_{V}, \\
C_{P}& = \left(\frac{\partial Q}{\partial T}\right)_{P}.
\end{align}
$$

At this point, equations $(I)$ and come in handy. They need to be compared with, which yields

$$
\begin{align}
C_{V}& =  \left(\frac{\partial Q}{\partial T}\right)_{V}\overset{(I)}{=}\left(\frac{\partial Q}{\partial V}\right)_{V}, \\
C_{P}& = \left(\frac{\partial Q}{\partial T}\right)_{P} \overset{(II)}{=}\left(\frac{\partial E}{\partial T}\right)_{P}+ P \left(\frac{\partial V}{\partial T}\right)_{P}.
\end{align}
$$

The second term in $C_{P}$  accounts for the fact that when temperature is increased at constant pressure, the system typically expands and thus performs work. Hence we need to supply additional heat to the system to enable this expansion. In $C_{V}$, this term is not present, because the volume is kept constant and so no expansion occurs. Note that the difference between $C_{P}$ and $C_{V}$ is largest for gases, whereas liquids and solids expand only moderately when heated.

## Specific Heat Capacity

The heat capacities $C_{V}$  and $C_{P}$ are extensive quantities. To get an intensive variable, it is common to divide by the total mass $M = m_{0}N$ of body to obtain the *specific heat capacities*

$$
c_{V}= \frac{C_{V}}{M}, \; c_{P}= \frac{C_{P}}{M}.
$$

The unit of $C$ is $J/K$, and the unit of $c$ is $J/(kgK)$. The ratio

$$
\kappa = \frac{C_{P}}{C_{V}}= \frac{c_{P}}{c_{V}}
$$

is called the heat capacity ratio. $c_{P}$ and $c_{V}$ are examples of material constants, because they encode information about a specific substance. They are measured and tabulated for most substances. We will meet more material constants later.

## Calorimeter

A calorimeter is a perfectly thermally isolated container containing two bodies in physical contact with each other, whose individual temperatures are monitored. The device can be used to measure about heat in general are the specific heat capacity of one body if it is known for the other body. Typically we have a solid object. Initially at temperature $T_{1}$, immersed into a caloric liquid such as water, initially at temperature $T_{2}$. As the two bodies reach thermal equilibrium, they acquire the same temperature $T_{3}$. Let use assume that initially $T_{1}> T_{2}$. Then the KAUR is heated during equilibration from $T_{2}$ to $T_{3}$. If we neglect the expansion of water upon heating, then the water absorbs the heat

$$
Q = M_{w}c_{P}^{(w)}(T_{3}-T_{2}),
$$

where $M_{w}$ is the total mass of the water and $c_{P}^{w}= 4.182J/gK$ is the specific heat capacity of water. To measure the specific heat capacity $c_{P}^{s}$ of the solid, we neglect the volume contraction of the solid upon cooling, so that $-Q$ is released from the solid into the water. We have

$$
-Q = M_{s}c_{P}^{s}(T_{3}-T_{1})
$$

hence

$$
c_{P}^{s}= \frac{M_{w}(T_{3}-T_{2})}{M_{s}(T_{1}-T_{3})}c_{P}^{w}
$$