# Adiabatic Transformation of a Gas

A transformation is called *adiabatic* if the following two conditions are satisfied:

1. The transformation is reversible
2. The system is thermally isolated so that no heat can be exchanged between the system and the environment.

Condition 2 implies that $dQ= 0$ during the transformation and that the first law reads $\Delta E + L = 0$ for adiabatic processes.

We can expand or compress a gas adiabatically by enclosing it in a cylinder with non-heat-conducting walls and a movable piston on one end, and very slowly shifting the piston inward and outward. In this case, the gas molecules have enough time to adjust to the small gradual volume changes during the process and we effectively are in an equilibrium state at any time, hence the transformation is reversible.

Now we recall the reversible run of the isothermal expansion.

A gas that expands adiabatically does external work, so $L$ is positive in the first law. Hence, $\Delta E$ . Must be negative, and the energy of a gas decreases during an adiabatic expansion. Since the energy is related to the temperature through $E = C_{V}T$ for an ideal gas (or a similar relation for real gases), a decrease in energy means a decrease in temperature of the gas.

Using $dE = C_{V}dT$ for ideal gases we have

$$
C_{V}dT + PdV = 0.
$$

Using the equation of state $PV = Nk_{B}T$, we can eliminate the pressure to obtain

$$
C_{V}dT + \frac{Nk_{B}T}{V}dV = 0,
$$

or

$$
\frac{dT}{T}+ \frac{Nk_{B}}{C_{V}}\frac{dV}{V}= 0.
$$

Integrating:

$$
\ln T+ \frac{Nk_{B}}{C_{V}}\ln V = c
$$

Which can be rewritten as

$$
TV^{\frac{Nk_{B}}{C_{V}}}= c
$$

or, using $C_{P}= C_{V}+ Nk_{B}$ and $\kappa = C_{P}/C_{V}$, as

$$
TV^{\kappa-1}= c.
$$

Using $PV = Nk_{B}T$ we readily find that

$$
\begin{align}
PV^{\kappa}& = c \\
T^{\kappa}P^{1-\kappa} & = c
\end{align}
$$

where $c$ is a constant.