# Division and Greatest Common Divisors

If $a, b\in \mathbb{Z}$ then $b$ is said to *divide* $a$ if there is $c \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $a = bc$. In this case, we write $b|a$

**Remark:** The integer $0$ is divisible by every integer, even by $0$, because if $b \in \mathbb{Z}$, then $0 = b \cdot 0$.

#### Proposition 1.1

Let $a, b\in \mathbb{Z}$, and assume that $b \neq 0$. Then there are unique $q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $0 \leq r <|b|$ such that $a = qb + r$. 

**Proof:** For existence, we first prove by induction that, for each $a \geq 0$, there are $q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $0 \leq r <|b|$ and $a = qb + r$. The case $a = 0$ holds, because $0 = 0 \cdot b + 0$. Now let $a \geq 0$, and assume that there are $q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $o \leq r <|b|$ and $a = qb + r$. We have two cases to consider.
1. $r \leq|b|-2$. Then $a + 1= qb + (r + 1)$, and $r + 1$ is still less than $|b|$.
2. $r =|b|-1$. In this case, $$\begin{align}a + 1 = qb + r + 1 = qb +|b|= \begin{cases}(q + 1) b \; \text{if}\; b > 0 \\ (q-1) b \; \text{if}\; b < 0.\end{cases}\end{align}$$

By induction, we have settled existence $a \geq 0$.

For $a < 0$, we observe that $-a-1 \geq 0$, so by the above, there are $q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $0 \leq r <|b|$ such that $-a-1 = qb + r$. Hence,

$$a =-qb-r-1 =-qb-|b|+|b|-r-1=-\left(q + \frac{|b|}{b}\right) b + (|b|-r-1).$$

Note that $|b|/b = \pm1$ and is therefore an integer. Further, because $0 \leq r <|b|$, we have $0 \leq|b|-r-1 <|b|$, so we are done.

It remains to prove uniqueness. Suppose that $q_{1}b + r_{1}= q_{2}b + r_{2}$, where $q_{1}, q_{2}, r_{1}, r_{2}$ are integers with $0 \leq r_{1}, r_{2}<|b|$. Then $(q_{1}+ q_{2})b = r_{2}-r_{1}= 0$ i.e., $r_{1}= r_{2}$. Hence, $q_{1}b = q_{2}b$, so $q_{1}= q_{2}$.

The integers $q$ and $r$ in proposition 1.1 are called the *quotient* and *remainder* of the division.

## Greatest Common Divisors

If $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$ a *common divisor* of $a$ and $b$ is an integer that divides both $a$ and $b$, for example, the common divisors of $15$ and $35$ are $-1, 1,-5, 5$.

We define a greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$ to be a positive common divisor of $a$ and $b$that is divisible by all common divisors.

### Theorem 1.2 (G.C.D Theorem)

Let $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$, not both zero.

1. A greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$ exists, and it is unique, we denote it $\text{gcd}(a, b)$.
2. There are $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $\text{gcd}(a, b)= ma + nb.$ ^75f029

**Proof:** Let $I = \{ma + nb|\; m, n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$. Observe that $I$ is closed under subtraction, which is to say that if $k, l \in I$ and $t \in \mathbb{Z}$, then $tk \in I$.

Because $a$ and $b$ are not both zero, $I$ contains positive elements. So let $d$ be the least positive element of $I$. We claim that $I= d \mathbb{Z}$, the set of all integer multiples of $d$. One direction is clear: Because $d \in I$ and $I$ is closed under multiplication by integers, it follows that $d \mathbb{Z}\subseteq I$. Conversely, take any $c \in I$. By  [[#Proposition 1.1]], there are $q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $0 \leq r < d$ such that $c = qd + r$. Then $r = c-qd$, which is in $I$ because $I$ is closed under subtraction and under multiplication by integers. Thus, $r$ is a non-negative element of $I$ that is less  than $d$, so because $d$ is the least positive element of $I$, we conclude that $r = 0$. Hence, $qd \in I$. Would have proven our claim that $I = d \mathbb{Z}$, that is,

$$\{ma + nb|\; m, n \in \mathbb{Z}\}= d \mathbb{Z}.$$

Now, $a, b \in I$, so $a, b \in d \mathbb{Z}$, which is to say that $d$ divides both. Thus, $d$ is a positive common divisor of $a$ and $b$. Further,$d \in I$, so there are $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $d = ma + nb$. Therefore, if $e$ divides both $a$ and $b$, then $e$ divides $d$. Thus, $d$ is a greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$.

Finally, to prove uniqueness, suppose that $d$ and $d'$ are both greatest common divisors of $a$ and $b$. Then $d'|d$ and $d|d'$, so $did = d'$ because they are both positive.

**Remark:** Although the greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$ is unique, the integers $m$ and $n$ represent appearing in [[#^75f029|part (ii)]] of Theorem 1.2 are not not. Indeed, if $a' = a/d \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $b' = b/d \in \mathbb{Z}$, then for all $k\in \mathbb{Z}$,

$$ma + nb = ma + kda' b'-kda' b' + nb = (m + kb') a + (n-ka') b.$$

We will see next an efficient algorithm for finding greatest common divisors.