# The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic

The *prime numbers* are an essential notion to studying the integers. A prime number is defined as an integer greater than $1$ whose only divisors are $1$ and itself. The sequence of primes starts $2, 3, 5, 7, 11,...$

#### Lemma 3.1 (Unique Factorization)

Let $p$ be a prime. If $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $p|ab$, then $p|a$ or $p|b$.

**Proof:** Assume that $p|a$ and let $d = gcd (p, a)$. Being a positive divisor of $p$, $d$ is either $1$ or $p$. If $d = p$, then $p|a$. Otherwise, $d = 1$, so by [[2.1- Division and Greatest Common Divisors#Theorem 1 2 G C D Theorem|Theorem 1.2]] there exists $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $1 = mp + na$, and so $b = mpb + nab$. But because $p|ab$, there is $c \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $ab = pc$, so $b = mpb + npc$, and so $p|b$.

### Theorem 3.2 (Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic)

Every positive integer can be factorized into a product of primes, and the factorization is unique up to the order of prime factors. (We allow $1$ to be the empty product of primes).

**Proof:** We prove the existence of a prime factorization of an integer $n \geq 1$ using induction. The base case $n =1$ holds trivially, as it is the empty product of primes. Now we let $n \geq 1$, and assume that every positive integer $k \leq n$ is a product of primes. (This is second form induction). If $n + 1$ is prime, we are done. Otherwise, $n + 1= ab$ where $a$ and $b$ are integers greater than $1$ and less than $n + 1$. Therefore, by the inductive hypothesis, each of $a$ and $b$ is a product of primes, so the same is true of $ab = n + 1$. Induction is complete, and existence is proven.

For uniqueness, suppose that

$$p_{1}p_{2}\cdots p_{r}= q_{1}q_{2}\cdots q_{s}$$

Where the $p_{i}$ and $q_{j}$ are primes. We may assume that $r \leq s$. Because $p_{1}|q_{1}q_{2}\cdots q_{s}$, the follows from lemma 1.3 that $p_{1}|q_{j}$ for some $j$. Reordering if necessary, we may assume that $p_{1}|q_{1}$. But $p_{1}$ and $q_{1}$ are prime, so $p_{1}= q_{1}$. Hence, canceling $p_{1}= q_{1}$ from both sides of the above equation gives

$$p_{2}p_{3}\cdots p_{r}= q_{2}q_{3}\cdots q_{s}.$$

Continuing in this way (or using induction to make this precise), we arrive at $1 = q_{r + 1}q_{r + 2}\cdots q_{s}$, but because no prime can divide $1$, the product on the right is necessarily the empty product. Therefore, $r = s$ and $p_{i}= q_{i}\; \forall \; i$.

#### Corollary 3.3 (Infinitely Many Primes)

There are infinitely many primes.

**Proof:** This proof is attributed to Euclid himself. Suppose there were finitely many primes, $p_{1}\cdots p_{r}$. Let $N = p_{1}p_{2}\cdots p_{r}+ 1$.  Because $N$ is an integer greater than $1$, it has a prime divisor by the existence part of Theorem 3.2. This prime divisor must be $p_{i}$ for some $i$. But then $p_{i}$ divides both $N$ and $p_{1}p_{2}\cdots p_{r}= N-1$, so it divides $N-(N-1)= 1$, a contradiction. Therefore, there are infinitely many primes.

Additionally, two integers are said to be *coprime* if the only positive integer dividing both is $1$.