# Laplace's Equation

## Introduction

The main task of electrodynamics is to find the electric field of any given (stationary) charge distribution. We do this by solving Coulomb's Law:

$$
\begin{align}
\mathbf{E}(\mathbf{r}) = \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int \frac{\hat{\mathcal{R}}}{\mathcal{R}^{2}}\rho(\mathbf{r'})d \tau'.
\end{align}
$$

These types of integrals are often very difficult to solve. Only the simplest charge configurations can realistically be solved using the direct application of Coulomb's Law. Other times we may get away with exploiting the symmetry of the system and use Gauss' Law, but in general our best bet is to first find the *potential* $V$ of the system, which is given by the somewhat more wieldy

$$
\begin{align}
V (\mathbf{r}) = \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int \frac{\rho (\mathbf{r'})}{\mathcal{R}}d \tau'
\end{align}
$$

Still this integral can be to tough to solve analytically. In such cases we reword the problem in differential form, using Poisson's equation

$$
\begin{align}
\nabla^{2}V= -\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}
\end{align}
$$

Which, with appropriate boundary conditions, is equivalent to the potential equation. Frequently, we are interested in finding the potential in a region where $\rho = 0$. If this is the case, we get the much simpler

$$
\begin{align}
\nabla^{2} V = 0.
\end{align}
$$

Laplace's equation is so fundamental that one could argue electrodynamics is the study of this equation. Laplace's equation doesn't just appear in electrodynamics either; it is found in gravity, heat flow, analytic function theory, and more. Before tackling Laplace's equation in its full, three dimensional glory, we will begin by looking at its one-and-two-dimensional equivalents, which are easier to picture, and still illustrate all the essential properties of the three-dimensional case.

## Laplace's Equation in One Dimension

If $V$ only depends on the variable $x$, then Laplace's equation reads

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{d^{2}V}{dx^{2}}= 0;
\end{align}
$$

The general solution being a straight line

$$
V (x) = mx + b.
$$

The coefficients are determined by the boundary conditions. You will find that $V (x)$ is the average of $V (x + a)$ and $V (x-a)$. In that sense, Laplace's equation is a kind of averaging instruction. These types of solutions are the most boring solutions that still satisfy the boundary conditions. Another thing you will notice is that Laplace's equation does not leave space for extreme values to occur other than at the endpoints. This is a consequence of requiring the second derivative be zero.

## Laplace's Equation in Two Dimensions

If $V$ depends on $x$ and $y$, Laplace's equation becomes

$$
\frac{\partial^{2}V}{\partial x^{2}}+ \frac{partial^{2}V}{\partial y^{2}} = 0.
$$

This is no longer an ordinary differential equation; it is a *partial* differential equation. It is impossible to write down a general solution in closed form, but certain properties can be deduced that apply to all solutions. We will go over how to obtain these solutions in another chapter.

## Laplace's Equation in Three Dimensions

The exact same properties hold in three dimensions as they did in one and two dimensions. That is all.

## Boundary Conditions and Uniqueness Theorems

Naturally, Laplace's equation alone does not give us a solution to $V$; we must also supply it with suitable boundary conditions. So what are these appropriate boundary conditions? The one dimensional case was easy, as this was just a second order homogeneous differential equation, which requires only two constants to be known. In the higher dimensional cases we are confronted with partial differential equations, where finding suitable boundary conditions may not be so obvious. However the answer is, quite intuitively, that $V$ is uniquely determined by its value at the boundary. This is summarized in the form of the **First Uniqueness theorem**

**First Uniqueness Theorem:** The solution to Laplace's equation in some volume $\mathcal{V}$ is uniquely determined if $V$ is specified on the boundary surface $\mathcal{S}$.
**Corollary:** The potential in a volume $\mathcal{V}$ is uniquely determined if (a) the charge density throughout the region, and (b) the value of $V$ on all boundaries, are specified.

The corollary allows us to throw some charge inside the region in question, improving the uniqueness theorem.

## Conductors and the Second Uniqueness Theorem

The simplest way to set the boundary conditions for an electrostatic problem is to specify the value of $V$ on all surfaces surrounding the registration of interest. This often occurs in practice, but sometimes we do not know the potential, but rather the charges on various conducting surfaces. Let's say there's some specified charge density $\rho$ in the region between conductors. Is the electric field uniquely determined? Or are there perhaps a number of different ways the charges could arrange themselves on their respective conductors, each leading to a different field?

**Second Uniqueness Theorem** in a volume $\mathcal{V}$ surrounded by conductors and containing a specified charge density $\rho$, the electric field is uniquely determined if the *total charge* on each conductor is given. 