# The Method of Images

## The Classic Image Problem

Suppose a point charge $q$ is held a distance $d$ above an infinite grounded conducting plane. What is the potential in the registration above the plane? It's not just $(1/4 \pi \epsilon_{0})q/\mathcal{R}$, for $q$ will induce a certain amount of negative charge on the nearby surface of the conductor; the total potential is due in part to $q$ directly, and in part to this  induced charge. But how can we possibly calculate the potential, when we don't know how much charge is induced are how it is be distributed?

From a mathematical point of view, we have to solve Poisson's equation in the region $z > 0$, with a single point charge $q$ at $(0, 0, d)$, subject to the boundary conditions:

1. $V = 0$ when $z = 0$ (since the conducting plane is grounded), and
2.  $V \rightarrow 0$ for from the charge (that is, for $x^{2}+ y^{2}\gg d^2$).

The first uniqueness theorem guarantees that there is only one function that meets these requirements. If we can guess such a function, it has to be the answer. *Trick:* Forget the actual problem, we're just going to study a completely different situation. This new configuration consists of *two* point charges, $+ q$ and $-q$, at $(0, 0, d)$ and $(0, 0,-d)$ respectively, with no conducting plane. For this configuration, the potential can be written down easily:

$$
\begin{align}
V (x, y, z) = \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\left[\frac{q}{\sqrt{x^{2}+ y^{2}+ (z-d)^{2}}} - \frac{q}{\sqrt{x^{2}+ y^{2}+ (z + d)^{2}}}\right].
\end{align}
$$

This problem has the exact same boundary conditions as our original problem! By the uniqueness theorem, having solved this problem with identical boundary conditions, we have solved our initial problem.