# Preliminary Comments on $\mathbb{R}^n$

Let $\mathbb{R}$ denote the real numbers. Their $n$-fold Cartesian product

$$
\overbrace{\mathbb{R}\times \cdots \times \mathbb{R}}^{n},
$$

denoted $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ is then the set off all ordered $n$-tuples $(x^{1}... x^{n})$ of real numbers. These tuples may then be represented by a single letter, i.e. $x = (x^{1}... x^{n})$, $a = (a^{1}... a^{n})$, and so on. For these notes, we agree to use the topology of $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ as a [metric space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_space) with the metric defined by

$$
d (x, y) = \left(\sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}(x^{i}-y^{i})^{2} \right)^{1/2}.
$$

We also let $\mathbb{R}^{1}= \mathbb{R}$ and define $\mathbb{R}^{0}$ to be a single point. Now, while this will be the usual consider $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ with the topology defined by the metric above, $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ may be used in several different senses, and we must choose which one we mean in context. For example, $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ may denote an $n$-dimensional vector space, or it may be identified as Euclidean space itself. We focus on the second one here and leave the third one for later.

One of the basic theorems of vector spaces over $R$ is the theorem which states that any two vector spaces over $R$ which have the same finite dimension $n$ are isomorphic. This isomorphism depends on the choice of basis for both spaces, and in general there is no natural (or *canonical*) isomorphism that is independent of these choices of bases. There does exist one important example of an $n$-dimensional vector space over $R$ which has a canonical basis: this is the vector space of $n$-tuples of real numbers with componentwise addition and scalar multiplication. As a set, this is really just $\mathbb{R}^{n}$, but to avoid confusion, we will denote this vector space by $\mathbb{V}^{n}$, and use boldface for its elements. For this space, the $n$-tuples $\mathbf{e}_{1}= (1, 0, ..., 0), ..., \mathbf{e}_{n}= (0, ..., 1)$ are the canonical basis. These tuples may be thought of as either $n \times 1$ matrices, or $1 \times n$ matrices. This distinction becomes important only when we wish so use matrix notation to simplify things such as describing linear mappings, equations, etc.

We may sometimes mean even more by $\mathbb{R}^{n}$. An abstract $n$-dimensional vector space over $R$ is called *Euclidean* if it has a positive definite inner product defined over it. Once again, there is no natural way to choose such an inner product, but in the case of $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ or $V^{n}$, a natural choice is given by

$$
(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y})= \sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}x^{i}y^{i}.
$$

This is a great choice, as one of its main characteristics is that relative to this inner product the natural basis is orthonormal, $(\mathbf{e}_{i}, \mathbf{e}_{j})= \delta_{ij}$.

So at times $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ is a Euclidean space, but a special one equipped with a canonical orthonormal basis and inner product. An abstract vector space dose not have such a preferred basis, even if it is Euclidean. Using the inner product, we can actually define the metric of $\mathbb{R}^{n}$. Defining $\norm{\mathbf{x}}= \sqrt{(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{x})}$ as the *norm* of the vector $\mathbf{x}$, we have

$$
d (x, y)= \norm{\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{y}}.
$$

This convention is useful even when dealing with $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ as a metric space rather than a vector space. Also note that $\norm{x}= d (x, 0)$, the distance from $x$ to the origin. Notice that we can mix various interpretations of $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ together; in this equality, $\mathbf{x}$ is a vector on the left-hand side, and $x$ is the corresponding point on the right-hand side.