# Equivalence Relations

 Imagine that you are in a room in which all the people have blue eyes, brown eyes, green eyes, grey eyes, or hazel eyes. You might choose the group the people together by saying "Everyone with blue eyes stand here, everyone with brown eyes stand there," and so on. But another way to achieve the same effect would be to say simply, "Group yourself with all the people with the same eye color as you." This is obviously a much more straightforward command to give, and the is more akin to how we group objects together in mathematics.

To make this idea formal, we introduce the notion of a *binary relation* on a set. If $A$ is a set, then binary relation on $A$ is a subset $R$ of $A \times A$. If $(a, b)\in  R$, we write $a \sim_{R} b$, or just $a \sim b$ if there is no risk of ambiguity.

An example of a binary relation on the set $A = \{1, 2, 3\}$ is

$$R = \{(1, 3), (2, 2), (3, 1), (3, 2)\}.$$

Here, $1 \sim_{R}3, \; 2 \sim_{R}2, \; 3 \sim_{R}1$, and $3 \sim_{R}2$.

A binary relation is called an *equivalence relation* if all of the following hold:

1. For all $a \in A, \; a \sim_{R}a$. (Reflexivity)
2. For all $a, b \in A$, if $a \sim_{R}b$, then $b \sim_{R}a$. (Symmetry)
3. For all $a, b, c \in A$, if $a \sim_{R}b$ and $b \sim_{R}c$, then $a \sim c$. (Transitivity)

The binary relation in the previous example is not an equivalence relation. For example, the set is not reflexive, because $1 \nsim_{R}1$. However the following is an equivalence relation on $\{1, 2, 3, 4\}$ :

$$R= \{(1, 1), (2, 2), (3, 3), (4, 4), (1, 3), (3, 1), (1, 4), (4, 1), (4, 3), (3, 4)\}.$$

Since $1, 3, 4$ are all related to one another but $2$ is related only to itself.

It is more common to define a binary relation by declaring a rule to specify when $a \sim b$. For example, the following determine binary relation on $\mathbb{Q}$:

- $a \sim b$ if $a \leq b$.
- $a \sim b$ if $a-b \in \mathbb{Z}$.
**Exercise.** For each of the above binary relations on $\mathbb{Q}$, determine whether it is an equivalence relation. If any of the three properties fail, which ones? (For in class)

## Equivalence Classes

If $\sim$ is an equivalence relation on a set $A$, then for $a \in A$, the *equivalence class* of $a$ is the set

$$[a]= \{b \in A|b \sim a\}.$$

For example, if we define a relation $\sim$ on $\mathbb{Z}$ by specifying that $a \sim b$ if $a-b$ is an integer multiple of $3$, then $\sim$ is an equivalence relation, and there are three equivalence classes:

$$\begin{align}
[0]&= \{...,-9,-6,-3, 0, 3, 6, 9,...\}\\
[1]&= \{...,-8,-5,-2, 1, 4, 7, 10,...\}\\
[2]&= \{...,-7,-4,-1, 2, 5, 8, 11,...\}
\end{align}
$$

Note that $[0]= [3]= [6]$ and so on, and similarly for the other equivalence classes. Also note how every integer is in one and only one equivalence class. In fact, in general we have the following:

### Proposition 3.1

If $\sim$ is an equivalence relation an set $A$, then the equivalence classes partition $A$, i.e. every element of $A$ is in one and only one equivalence class. Two equivalence classes $[a]$ and $[b]$ are equal if and only if $a \sim b$.

#### Proof

Let $a \in A$. Then $a \sim a$ by reflexivity. Now suppose  $a\in [b]$, so

$$\begin{align}
a \sim b \quad \text{by definition,}\\
b \sim a \quad \text{by symmetry.}
\end{align}
$$

We show that $[a]= [b]$. If $c \in[a]$, then $c \sim a$, so $c \sim b$ by transitivity, and so $c \in [b]$. Thus $[a]\subseteq [b]$. On the other hand, if $d \in [b]$, then $d \sim b$ and $d \sim a$ from above, together with transitivity, and so $d \in [a]$. We have simultaneously proven both propositions.