# Induction

Suppose that you're walking down a street where all the houses along one side have the property that, whenever one house has a red door, the next house on the right also has a red door. If you go to the leftmost house and see that it has a red door, what can you conclude about all the other houses down the street? If your answer is that all the houses have red doors, you understand the basic idea behind induction. Like before, we now make the idea more formal.

## First Form of Induction

Let $n_{0}\in \mathbb{Z}$, and for each $n \geq n_{0}$, let $P (n)$ be a statement  depending on $n$. Assume

1. $P (n_{0})$ is true, and
2. $\forall \; n \geq n_{0}$, if $P (n)$ is true, then $P (n + 1)$ is also true.

Then $P (n)$ is true for all $n\geq n_{0}$.

So, in a proof that uses the first form of induction, we show that the case $n_{0}$ holds (often called the base case), then assume the statement holds for some $n > n_{0}$. (This is the inductive hypothesis), and then show that the statement $P (n + 1)$ holds.

**Example:** We prove by induction that

$$\sum\limits_{k = 1}^{n}\frac{1}{k (k + 1)}= \frac{n}{n + 1}.$$

For all $n \geq 1$. First we show the equality holds for for $n_{0}= 1$ (This is $P (n_{o}$).

$$ \begin{align}
\sum\limits_{k = 1}^{1}\frac{1}{k (k + t)}& = \frac{1}{1 (1 + 1)}\\
& = \frac{1}{2}\\
& = \frac{1}{1 + 1}\\
& = \frac{n}{n + 1}
\end{align}
$$

Now let $n \geq 1$, and assume that the above holds. Now we wish to show that it holds for $n + 1$.

$$\begin{align}
\sum\limits_{k = 1}^{n + 1}\frac{1}{k (k + 1)}& = \sum\limits_{k = 1}^{n}\frac{1}{k (k + 1)}+ \frac{1}{(n + 1) (n + 2)}\\[1em]
& = \frac{n}{n + 1}+ \frac{1}{(n + 1)(n + 2)}\\[1em]
& = \frac{n (n + 2)+ 1}{(n + 1)(n + 2)}\\[1em]
& = \frac{n + 1}{n + 2}
\end{align}
$$

## Second Form of Induction

Let $n_{0}\in \mathbb{Z}$, and for each $n \geq n_{0}$, let $P (n)$ be a statement depending on $n$. Assume that
1. $P (n_{0})$ is true, and
2. for all $n \geq n_{0}$, if $P (k)$ is true for all $k \in \{n_{0},..., n\}$, then $P (n + 1)$ is true.

In a proof by induction that uses this second form, we show that the case $n = n_{0}$ holds (the base case), then let $n \geq n_{0}$ and assume that $P (k)$. Holds for all $k \in \{n_{0},..., n\}$, and then show that the statement $P (n + 1)$ holds.

The two forms of induction are equivalent, i.e. each implies the other.

**Example:** Show that for every integer $n \geq 12$, there are $x, y \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$ such that $n = 4x + 5y$. The base case, $n = 12$ is true because $12 = 4 \cdot 3 + 5 \cdot 0$. Now let $n \geq 12$, and assume that, for all $k \in \{12,... n\}$, there exist $x, y \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$ such that $k = 4x + 5y$ (inductive hypothesis). We want to show that $n + 1$ can also be expressed as such. The trick is to subtract $4$ from $n + 1$, apply the inductive hypothesis to $(n + 1)-4$, and then add $4$ back on.

First note that $13 = 2 \cdot 4 + 1 \cdot 5$, $14 = 1 \cdot 4 + 2 \cdot 5$, and $15 = 0 \cdot 4 + 3 \cdot 5$, so we may assume that $n \geq 15$. Hence, $(n + 1)-4= n-3 \geq 12$, but also $n-3 \leq n$, so by the inductive hypothesis, there are $x, y \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$ such that $n-3 = 4x + 5y$. Therefore,

$$n + 1 = (n-3)+ 4 = 4x + 5y + 4 = 4 (x + 1)+ 5y,$$

As desired. By induction, we are done.