# Pertuum Mobile

A *perpetuum mobile* (Latin for "perpetual mover") or *perpetual motion machine* a is an impossible machine that operates in cycles and, once started, would run forever and do work. **The first law of thermodynamics rules out the possibility of constructing a perpetual motion machine.**

For one, in a thermally isolated system, the energy does not change in a cycle, and due to the first law the work done is zero. When including the environment into the setting, any machine supplied with a finite amount of energy at a given time will eventually stop because over time energy is lost to heat due to friction. The first law forbids a machine that creates energy, which it could use to compensate this friction loss or do work.

The first law does not limit the possibility of transforming one form of energy into another, such as transforming work to heat, and heat to work, as long as the total amount of energy remains constant. Indeed, we can always transform work into heat, for instance, by using friction to turn mechanical work into an equal amount of heat, or using electric currents to heat up a resistance element, thus transforming electrical work it into heat. Work can, in principle, be 100% converted into heat.

However, one experimentally observes definite limitations to the possibilities of transforming heat into work. If this were not the case, would could construct a machine that continuously absorbs heat from its environment and uses this heat to perform work. Since the amount of thermal energy in the soil, water, atmosphere is practically unlimited, such a machine would effectively be operating like a perpetuum mobile. Therefore, it is called a *perpetuum mobile of the second kind*.

The second law of thermodynamics rules out the possibility of constructing a perpetuum mobile of the second kind. It implies limits on what fraction of heat can (at best) be converted into work.