# Statement of the Second Law

We state the second law in two forms:

## Kelvin's Formulation

**There is no transformation whose only final result is to completely transform heat extracted from a heat source at constant temperature into work.**

The word "only" is important here:

1. It *is* possible to completely transform heat from a source at constant temperature into work, provided some other change in the state of the system is present at the end of the process. Furthermore,
2.  If some heat is released to another body during the process, then the conversion of heat to work is not the only final result.

The word "completely" is, strictly speaking, superfluous and. Implied by "only". The wording is to suggest that a positive amount of heat $Q > 0$ is absorbed by the system and converted into a positive work done $L > 0$. If $L <0$, i.e. work $W > 0$ is performed on the system, then the system could convert this work via friction into negative heat $Q =-W < 0$ that is released into the environment. We then have a situation where the only final result is that work is completely converted into heat. No constraint arises in this case, because work can always be completely converted into heat.

## Clausius' Formulation

**There is no transformation whose only final result is to transfer heat from a body at a given temperature to a body at a higher temperature.**

Clausius' formulation implies that some work must be performed in order to transfer heat from a colder body to a hotter body. This work requires an external energy source, so that the supply of energy through work is an additional final result of the process. Refrigerators, of course, operate in this way and are not forbidden by the second law of thermodynamics.