# Heat Engines and Refrigerators

A machine to uses the flow of heat from a body at higher temperature $T_{2}$ to a body at lower temperature $T_{1}$ to perform work is called a *heat engine*. Denote the amount of heat per cycle extracted from body $2$ by $Q_{2}$ and the amount of heat per cycle submitted to body $1$ by $Q_{1}$. The work performed per cycle is $L = Q_{2}-Q_{1}> 0$. We define the *efficiency* of a heat engine by

$$
\eta = \frac{L}{Q_{2}} = 1- \frac{Q_{1}}{Q_{2}}.
$$

Crucially, the underlying cycle need not be reversible are a Carnot cycle. An engine using a reversible cycle will be called a *reversible engine*.

Note that $\eta$ is the fraction of heat converted into work. The closer $\eta$ is to $100 \%$, the better for applications. Kelvin's statement implies $\eta < 1$. In the following two sections, he can Cho that the efficiency of any reversible engine operating between $T_{2}$ and $T_{1}$ is identical, and satisfies

$$
\eta_{\text{rev}}= 1-\frac{T_{1}}{T_{2}}.
$$

Typically the body at lower temperature, into which the  amount of heat $Q_{1}> 0$ is dumped and lost, is the environment of the engine, thus we usually cannot control $T_{1}$. In practice, it would be difficult to run an engine with very low $T_{1}\rightarrow 0$, since we continuously dump heat into $1$. To get a large efficiency, we want $T_{2}$ to be as high as possible. Of course, any actual efficiency will generally be lower than $\eta_{\text{rev}}$, because all actual heat engines are for from being reversible. In fact,

$$
\eta \leq \eta_{\text{rev}}
$$

In general.

We consider two engines that operate between the same temperatures $T_{1}$ and $T_{2}$ . The first engine shall be characterized by $(L, Q_{1}, Q_{2})$, the second engine by $(L', Q_{1}', Q_{2}')$. We show the following fundamental theorem:

1. If the first engine is reversible, then $$\frac{Q_{2}}{Q_{1}}\geq \frac{Q_{2}'}{Q_{1}'}.$$
2. If both engines are reversible, then $$\frac{Q_{2}}{Q_{1}}= \frac{Q_{2}'}{Q_{1}'}.$$

Note that $2$ implies that $\eta_{\text{rev}}$ is identical for all reversible engines operating between $T_{1}$ and $T_{2}$, whereas $1$ implies $\eta \leq \eta_{\text{rev}}$. The second engine in $1$ need not be reversible.

A refrigerator is a heat engine run in the reverse direction, which extracts an amount of heat $Q_{1}$ from a source at low temperature $T_{1}$ by absorbing work $W > 0$, and dumps an amount of heat $Q_{2}$ to a source at higher temperature $T_{2}$. The work $W > 0$ is required by Clausius' formulation of the second law. The *coefficient of performance* is given by

$$
\text{COP} = \frac{Q_{1}}{W}> 1
$$

For a reversible refrigerator we have

$$
\text{COP}_{\text{rev}} = \frac{T_{1}}{T_{2}-T_{1}}
$$