# First Properties of Rings

#### Proposition 2.1

If $R$ is a ring, the element $0$ in [[4.1- Binary Operations and the Definition of a Ring#^6c1f7b|axiom A3]] is unique.

**Proof:** Suppose that both $0$ and $0'$ satisfy the axiom, i.e.,

$$
\begin{align}
0 + a & = a \\
0' + a & = a
\end{align}
$$

For all $a \in \mathbb{R}$. Then

$$
\begin{align}
0' & = 0 + 0'\\
& = 0' + 0 \\
& = 0 \; \text{for}\; a = 0
\end{align}
$$

The unique element $0$ satisfying axiom A3 is called the the *zero element* of $R$. It is often denoted $0_{R}$, but when there is no risk of ambiguity, we often write $0$ instead.

#### Proposition 2.2

If $R$ is a ring, then for each $a \in R$, the element $b \in R$ appearing in [[4.1- Binary Operations and the Definition of a Ring#^3ebbf6|axiom A4]], i.e., such $b + a = 0_{R}$ is unique.

**Proof:** Let $a\in R$, and suppose that $b, b'\in R$ satisfy $b + a = 0_{R}$ and $b' + a = 0_{R}$. Note, of course, that $a + b' = 0_{R}$ as well by commutativity of addition. Then

$$
\begin{align}
b' & = 0_{R}+ b' \\
& = (b + a)+ b' \\
& = b + (a + b')\\
& = b + 0_{R}\\
& = b.
\end{align}
$$

For a given $a \in R$, the unique $b \in R$ such that $b + a = 0$ is called the *additive inverse* of $a$ and is denoted $-a$. Thus, $(-a)+ a = a + (-a)= 0_{R}$. If $x, y \in R$, then $x-y$ is defined to be $x + (-y)$.

#### Proposition 2.3

If $a \in R$ and $0_{R}$ is the zero element of $R$, then $0_{R}\cdot a= a \cdot0_{R}= 0_{R}$.

**Proof:** Because $0_{R}= 0_{R}+ 0_{R}$,

$$
0_{R}\cdot a = (0_{R}+ 0_{R})\cdot a = 0_{R}\cdot a + 0_{R}\cdot a
$$

By distributivity. Hence, adding $-(0_{R}\cdot a)$ to both sides of the equation yields

$$
\begin{align}
0_{R}\cdot a-0_{R}\cdot a & = (0_{R}\cdot a+ 0_{R}\cdot a)-0_{R}\cdot a, \\
0_{R}& = 0_{R}\cdot a.
\end{align}
$$

The equality $a \cdot 0_{R}= 0_{R}$ is proven similarly.

#### Proposition 2.4

If $a, b, c \in R$, then $a \cdot (b - c)= a \cdot b - a \cdot c$ and $(b-c)\cdot a= b \cdot a-c \cdot a$. The proof is left as an exercise to the reader.

## Adding a Ring Element to Itself a Negative Number of Times

Let $R$ be a ring. We have already seen the definition of $na$ when $a \in R$ and $n$ is a positive integer. Now that we have introduced additive inverses, we may even define $na$ when $n < 0$. Namely, if $a \in R$ and $n$ is a negative integer, then $-n > 0$ and we define

$$
na =-(-n)a,
$$

that is, $na$ is defined to be the additive inverse of $(-n)a$. For example, $(-4)a =-(4a)=-(a + a + a + a)$. Note that $na$ is not to be considered a multiplication ; we are not multiplying $n$ and $a$together in the ring. Indeed, there is no reason that $R$ should contain integers at all in general.

Finally, for completeness, we define $0a = 0_{R}$, where $a \in R, \; 0_{R}$ is the zero element of $R$, and $0$ is the integer zero. To avoid any confusion, it is worth emphasizing at this point that

$$
\begin{align}
0_{R}\cdot a & = 0_{R}\\
0a & = 0_{R}.
\end{align}
$$