# First Examples of Rings

Let us look at some examples of rings.

- The set of integers, $\mathbb{Z}$, together with the usual operations of addition and multiplication, is a ring. It is [[4.3- Commutative and Unital Rings|commutative and unital]].
- The set of rational numbers, $\mathbb{Q}$, is a ring. Again, it is commutative and unital. The same goes for the set $\mathbb{R}$ of real numbers.
- If $n$ is a positive integer, then the set $M_{n}(\mathbb{R})$ of $n \times n$ matrices with real entries forms a ring. Are, in which the two operations are the usual addition and multiplication of $n \times n$ matrices. The ring $M_{n}(\mathbb{R})$ is unital, having the $n \times n$ identity matrix as its identity element. However, when $n \geq 2, \; M_{n}(\mathbb{R})$ is not commutative. For example, in the $2 \times 2$case, we may consider the matrices $$
\begin{align}
A =
\begin{pmatrix}
1&0 \\ 0&0
\end{pmatrix}, \;
B =
\begin{pmatrix}
0&1 \\ 0&0
\end{pmatrix}
\end{align}
$$ where it should be clear that $BA \neq AB$. This follows for all other $n \times n$ matrices for $n > 2$.
- Let $\mathcal{F}$ denote the set of functions $\mathbb{R}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$. If we define operations of addition and multiplication on $\mathcal{F}$ by $$\begin{align} (f + g) (x) & = f (x) + g (x)\\ (f \cdot g) (x) & = f (x) g (x),\end{align}$$ then $\mathcal{F}$ is a ring. Further, it is commutative and unital, the identity element being the constant function $x \mapsto 1$. The commutativity of $\mathcal{F}$ follows from the commutativity of $\mathbb{R}$: If $f, g \in \mathcal{F}$, then for all $x \in \mathbb{R}$, $$(f \cdot g)(x) = f (x)g (x)= g (x)f (x)= (g \cdot f)(x),$$ so $f \cdot g = g \cdot f$.
- If $X$ is a set, we define the *power set* of $X, \; P (X)$, to be the set of subsets of $X$. That is, $$P (X)\{A \;|\; A \subseteq X\}.$$ We may define operations of addition and multiplication on $P (X)$ by $$\begin{align}A + B & = (A \smallsetminus B) \cup (B \smallsetminus A) = (A \cup B) \smallsetminus (A \cap B) \\ A \cdot B & = A \cap B\end{align}$$ With these operations, $P (X)$ is a commutative ring with identity, the identity element being $X$. Notice that the is zero element of $P (X)$ is $\emptyset$. For example, if $X = \{1, 2, 3\}$, then $$P (X)= \{\emptyset, \{1 \}, \{2 \}, \{1, 2 \}, \{3 \}, \{1, 3 \}, \{2, 3 \}, \{1, 2, 3 \}\}.$$ We have $$\{1\}+ \{2 \}= \{1, 2 \}, \quad \{1 \}\cdot \{2 \}= \emptyset, \quad \{1, 2 \}+ \{2, 3 \}= \{1, 3 \}, \quad \{1, 2 \}\cdot \{2, 3 \}= \{2 \}.$$
- Let $n$ be a positive integer. We denote by $\text{End} (\mathbb{R}^{n})$ the set of linear transformations $f:\; \mathbb{R}^{n}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}^n$. (Recall that a you linear transformation satisfies $f (\mathbf{u}+ \mathbf{v}) = f (\mathbf{u})+f (\mathbf{v})$ and $f (c \mathbf{u})= cf (\mathbf{u})$ for all vectors  $\mathbf{u, v}$ and all $c \in \mathbb{R}$.) We define addition and multiplication of linear transformations by $$ \begin{align}(f + g)(\mathbf{u})& = f (\mathbf{u})+ g (\mathbf{u})\\ f \cdot g & = f \circ g\end{align}$$ Then $\text{End}(\mathbb{R}^n)$ is a unital ring. However it is not commutative for $n \geq 2$. **Caution:** Compare the addition and multiplication operations of $\text{End}(\mathbb{R}^n)$ with those of $\mathcal{F}$. Note that addition is define similarly for both, but multiplication is different.