
## Polynomial Rings

Let $R$ be a  [[4.3- Commutative and Unital Rings|commutative unital ring]]. A polynomial with coefficients in $R$ is an expression of the form

$$
a_{n}x^{n}+ \cdots a_{1}x + a_{0}
$$

where $n$ is some non-negative integer and the coefficients $a_{i}$ are elements of the ring $R$.

The set of all such polynomials is denoted $R [x]$.

At first, the powers of $x$ could just be symbols without any particular meaning. We could even just represent the polynomial above by its vector coefficients, $(a_{n},..., a_{0})$. However, the powers of $x$ play an important role once we turn the set of polynomials if into a ring. Let us consider multiplication first, because that is the more interesting operation on polynomials. If $f (x)= a_{m}x^{m}+ \cdots a_{0}$ and $g (x)= b_{n}x^{n}+ \cdots b_{0}$ are polynomials in $R [x]$, then their product $f (x)g (x)$ is defined to be the polynomial

$$
f (x)g (x) = \sum\limits_{k = 0}^{m +n}\left(\sum\limits_{l = 0}^{k}a_{l}b_{k-l}\right) x^{k}
$$

**Example:** if $f (x)= 3x^{2}-4x + 5$ and $g (x)= 4x^{3}+ 7x^{2}+ 2x-3$ are in $\mathbb{Z}[x]$, then the coefficient of, say, $x^{2}$ is

$$
(3)(-3)+ (-4)(2)+ (5)(7)= 18
$$

Similarly, the coefficient of $x^{4}$ is $(3)(7)+ (-4)(4)= 5$. Written out in full,

$$
f (x)g (x)= 12x^{5}+ 5x^{4}-3^{3}+ 18x^{2}+ 22x-15.
$$

Note that, the way multiplication is defined, $x^{m}+ x^{n}= x^{m + n}$, as one would expect.

Addition is more straightforward: we just add component-wise (i.e., combine like terms). Using the same polynomials from above,

$$
f (x)+ g (x) = 4^{3}+ 10x^{2}-2x + 2.
$$

With the above operations of addition and multiplication, $R [x]$ forms a commutative unital ring. Its identity element is the polynomial $1$.

#### Remark

- Two polynomials in $R [x]$ are equal if and only if their coefficients are equal.
- The *degree* $\text{deg}(f)$ of a non-zero polynomial $f$ is the largest $n$ such that the coefficient of $x^{n}$ in $f$ is non-zero. The zero polynomial is defined to have degree $-\infty$ in this course.  
- For all $f, g \in R [x], \; \text{deg}(f + g)\leq \text{max}(\text{deg}(f), \text{deg}(g))$, and if $R$ is$\mathbb{Z}, \; \mathbb{Q}$, or $\mathbb{R}$, then $\text{deg}(fg)= \text{deg}(f)+ \text{deg}(g)$. We adopt the conventions that $-\infty \leq n$ and $-\infty + n =-\infty$ for all $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}\cup \{-\infty\}$
-  The *leading coefficient* of a non-zero polynomial is the coefficient of the highest power of $x$ occurring in the polynomial.

## Evaluation of Polynomials

Let $R$ be a commutative unital ring. If $f (x)= a_{n}x^{n}+ \cdots + a_{0}\in R [x]$ and $b \in R$, then the *evaluation* of $f$ at $b$ , denoted $f (b)$ is the element

$$
a_{n}+ b^{n}+ \cdots + a_{1}b + a_{0}
$$

of $R$. For a fixed $b$,

$$
\begin{align}
(f + g)(b)& = f (b)+ g (b)\\
(fg)(b)& = f (b)g (b)
\end{align}
$$

for all $f, g\in R [x]$.

## Rings of Sequences

Let $R$ be any ring. We set $\mathcal{S}(r)$ denote the set of all sequences

$$
(a_{n})_{n\geq 0}= (a_{0}, a_{1}, a_{2},...)
$$

with entries $a_{n}\in R$. Addition of sequences is defined component-wise, i.e.,

$$
(a_{0}, a_{1}, a_{2}...)+ (b_{0}, b_{1}, b_{2})= (a_{0}+ b_{0}, a_{1}+ b_{1}, a_{2}+ b_{2}...),
$$

as is multiplication:

$$
(a_{0}, a_{1},a_{2}...)\cdot (b_{0}, b_{1}, b_{2}...)= (a_{0}\cdot b_{0}, a_{1}\cdot b_{1}, a_{2}\cdot b_{2}...)
$$

More succinctly, we have

$$
\begin{align}
(a_{n})_{n\geq 0}+ (b_{n})_{n \geq 0}& =(a_{n}+ b_{n})_{n \geq 0}\\
(a_{n})_{n\geq 0}\cdot (b_{n})_{n \geq 0}& = (a_{n}\cdot b_{n})_{n \geq 0}
\end{align}
$$

With addition and multiplication defined this way, $\mathcal{S}(R)$ is a ring. It is commutative if and only if $R$ is, and unital if and only if $R$ is. If $R$ does not have an identity, then the identity in $\mathcal{S}(R)$ is $(1_{R})_{n \geq 0}= (1_{R}, 1_{R}, 1_{R}...)$.

Though the that, in this course, all sequences start with the index $n = 0$. With this convention made, we choose to omit the $\geq 0$ in the notation, and write simply $(a_{n})_{n}$for the sequence $(a_{0}, a_{1}, a_{2},...)$

A sequence may have any entries whatsoever. However, some sequences may be given by expressions in the indexing variable $n$.