# The Ring $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$

Let $n$ be a positive integer. Recall from [[3.1- Congruences|Section III-1]] that, for $a, b\in \mathbb{Z}, \; a \equiv b \mod n$  if and only if $n|a-b$. This is the very definition of congruence. We also saw that congruence $\mod n$ defines an [[1.3- Equivalence Relations|equivalence relation]] on $\mathbb{Z}$. The equivalence classes with respect to congruence are called *residue classes*, and we will denote the residue class of $a \mod n$ by $[a]_{n}$, or simply $[a]$ if there is no risk of ambiguity. Thus,

$$
[a]_{n}= \{b \in \mathbb{Z}|\; b \equiv a \mod n\}= \{b \in \mathbb{Z}|\; n \; \text{divides}\; b-a\}
$$
**Example:** The residue classes $\mod 5$ are

$$
\begin{align}
[0]& = \{...,-5, 0, 5, 10, ...\}\\
[1]& = \{...,-4, 1, 6, 11, ...\}\\
[2]& = \{...,-3, 2, 7, 12, ...\}\\
[3]& = \{...,-2, 3, 8, 13, ...\}\\
[4]& = \{...,-1, 4, 9, 14, ...\}
\end{align}
$$

If $n$ is a positive integer, the set of residue classes $\mod n$ is denoted $\mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z}$. In general,

$$
\mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z}= \{[0], [1], [2], ..., [n-1]\}.
$$

Note that each element of $\mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z}$ has many representations. For example, in $\mathbb{Z}/5 \mathbb{Z}$, $[2]= [7]= [-3]$ and so on, that is, the residue class $[2]$ is represented not only by $2$, but also by $7,-3$, and any $[b]$ for $b \equiv 2 \mod 5$. This is a phenomenon we will have to address when we start defining binary operations on $\mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z}$.

## Addition and Multiplication

We define an operation of addition on $\mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z}$ by

$$
[a]+ [b]= [a + b].
$$

This is well defined by [[3.1- Congruences#Proposition 1.1|Proposition 1.1]] in Section III.

**Example:** Let $x = [3]$ and $y = [4]$ in $\mathbb{Z}/5\mathbb{Z}$. Then

$$
x + y = [3]+ [4]= [3 + 4]= [7]
$$

But $x = [18]$ and $y = -21$, so

$$
x + y = [18]+ [21]= [18-21]= [-3].
$$

But we know $[7] = [-3]$ so the operation remains well defined.

Multiplication is defined similarly:

$$
[a]\cdot [b]= [a \cdot b].
$$

Which is again well defined by proposition 1.1 from Section III. With the above operations, $\mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z}$ is a commutative unital ring. The zero element is $[0]$, and the identity element is $[1]$.

## Units in $\mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z}$

#### Proposition 7.1

Let $n$ be a positive integer and $a \in \mathbb{Z}$. Then $[a]\in (\mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ if and only if $\gcd (a, n)= 1$, i.e. if and only if $a$ and $n$ are coprime.

**Proof:** Assume that $[a]\in (\mathbb{Z}/n \mathbb{Z})^{\times}$, i.e., there is $b \in \mathbb{Z}$such that $[b]\cdot [a]= [1]$. Then $n|ba-1$, so there is $k \in \mathbb{Z}$such that $ba-1 = kn$, i.e., $1 = ba-kn$. Therefore, any common divisor of $a$ and $n$ divides $1$, so $a$ and $n$ are coprime. The converse is true by [[2.1- Division and Greatest Common Divisors#Theorem 1.2 (G.C.D Theorem)|Theorem 1.2]]. If $a$ and $n$ are coprime, there are $b, c \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $1 = ba + cn$, so $n|ba-1$, and so $[ba]= 1$, i.e., $[b]\cdot [a]= 1$.