# Lorentz Transformations as Four-dimensional "Rotations "

For any particular event, we may choose to view it through a specific inertial reference frame $S$. This is mathematically just assigning a set of coordinates $(t, x, y, z)$ in the Minkowski spacetime to said event. If we then choose to view the same event from a different inertial reference frame $S'$, we are now reassigning to this event a new set of coordinates $(t', x', y', z')$. The primed and the unprimed coordinates are then related by the appropriate Lorentz transformation. What this means is that describing physics in different reference frames corresponds to performing a *coordinate transformation* on the Minkowski spacetime.

As an example, consider the case where $S'$ is related to $S$ via a spatial rotation through an angle $\theta$ about the $x$-axis. Then, we have

$$
\begin{align}
ct' & = ct \\[1 em]
x' & = x' \\[1 em]
y' & = y \cos \theta-z \sin \theta  \\[1 em]
z' & = y \sin \theta + z \cos \theta.
\end{align}
$$

This is rather similar to the Lorentz boost we've talked about, and we can make this clearer by introducing the *rapidity* parameter

$$
\psi = \tanh^{-1}\beta.
$$

As $\beta$ varies from zero to unity, $\psi$ ranges from $0$ to $\infty$. Also note that $\gamma = \cosh \psi$ and $\gamma \beta = \sinh \psi$. Therefore, for two inertial frames $S$ and $S'$ in standard configuration, we have

$$
\begin{align}
ct' & = ct \cosh \psi-x \sinh \psi \\[1 em]
x' & = -ct \sinh \psi + x \cosh \psi \\[1 em]
y' & = y \\[1 em]
z' & = z.
\end{align}
$$

This is basically the same as a spatial rotation, but with hyperbolic functions instead of trigonometric ones. The inverse transformations are obtained by replacing $\psi$ by $-\psi$.

In general, $S'$ will be moving with constant velocity $\vec{v}$ with respect to $S$ in an arbitrary direction, with its axes rotated with respect to $S$. Moreover, the origins of $S$ and $S'$ need not coincide at $t = t' = 0$ and may be separated by a vector displacement $\vec{a}$. The easiest way to find the corresponding transformation connecting the two reference frames is found most easily by decomposing the transformation into a displacement, followed by a spatial rotation, followed by a boost, followed again by a final spatial rotation. We line up the origins at $t = t', 0$, line up the $x$-axis of $S$ with the velocity vector $\vec{v}$ of $S'$, boost $S$ so that it is at rest with respect to $S'$, and finally do a last rotation to line up the coordinates of $S$ with $S'$. The only special-relativistic effects are caused by the boost; the rotations and displacements bring out no new physics. Therefore for simplicity and WLOG, we shall keep $S$ and $S'$ in the standard configuration