# The Electric Field

## Introduction

The fundamental problem we wish to solve in electrodynamics is as follows: We have some electric charges $q_{1}, q_{2}q_{3},...$ (which we call **source charges**); what is the force they exert on another charge $Q$ (called the **test charge**)? The positions of the source charges are given as functions of time, and we want to calculate the trajectory of the test charge. In general, both the source charges and the test charge are in motion.

The solution is facilitated by the **principle of superposition**, which states that the interaction between any two charges is unaffected by the presence of other charges. To calculate $Q$, then, we simply compute the force $\mathbf{F}_{1}$ due to $q_{1}$ alone, then $\mathbf{F}_{2}$ due to $q_{2}$ alone, and so on. Finally, we take the vector sum of all the forces, and we're done. Thus, if we can find the force due to one charge, we're essentially done, we just have to repeat the process for all sources and add it all up.

At first, this looks quite easy: Why don't we just write down the formula for the force  on$Q$ due to $q$, and be done with it? We *could*, but it would be quite the shock, for not only does the force depend on the distance $\mathcal{R}$, it also depends on *both* their velocities and on the acceleration of $q$. On top of that, its not the position, velocity, and acceleration of $q$ *right now* that matters, but rather the position, velocity, and acceleration of $q$ at some earlier point in time; electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light, which is fast, but finite.

Therefore, even though the question is fairly basic, to confront it head on would not be very illuminating. Because of this, we shall build the theory in stages, and in the process, discover solutions to problems that do not present themselves so simply.

We start with the easiest situation: all source charges be *stationary*, but we will allow the test charge to be in motion.

## Coulomb's Law

The force on a test charge $Q$ due to a source charge $q$  that is *at rest* a distance $\mathcal{R}$ away is given by **Coulomb's Law**:

$$
\mathbf{F}= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\frac{qQ}{\mathcal{R}^2}\hat{\mathbf{\mathcal{R}}}
$$

$\epsilon_{0}$ is a constant called the **permittivity of free space**. In SI units,

$$
\epsilon_{0}= 8.885 \cdot 10^{-12}\frac{C^2}{N \cdot m^2}.
$$

Basically, the force is proportional to the product of the charges and inversely proportional to the square of the separation distance. Note that $\vec{\mathcal{R}}$ is the separation vector from $\mathbf{r'}$ (the location of $q$) to $\mathbf{r}$ (the location of $Q$):

$$
\vec{\mathcal{R}}= \mathbf{r}-\mathbf{r'}
$$

$\mathcal{R}$ is its magnitude and $\hat{\mathcal{R}}$ its direction. The force points along the line from $q$ to $Q$; it is repulsive if they have the same sign, and attractive if they have opposite signs.

Electrostatics is entirely described by Coulomb's Law and the principle of superposition. Everything else — safe for some properties of matter — is just mathematical elaboration of these fundamental rules.

## The Electric Field

If we have several point charges $q_{1}, q_{2},..., q_{n}$, at distances $\mathcal{R}_{1}, \mathcal{R}_{2}, ..., \mathcal{R}_{n}$ from $Q$, the total force on $Q$ is

$$
\begin{align}
\mathbf{F} = \mathbf{F_{1}+ F_{2}}+... & = \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\left(\frac{q_{1}Q}{\mathcal{R}_{1}^{2}}\vec{\mathcal{R}}_{1}+ \frac{q_{2}Q}{\mathcal{R}_{2}^{2}}\vec{\mathcal{R}}_{2}+... \right)\\
& = \frac{Q}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\left(\frac{q_{1}}{\mathcal{R}_{1}^{2}}\vec{\mathcal{R}}_{1}+ \frac{q_{2}}{\mathcal{R}_{2}^{2}}\vec{\mathcal{R}}_{2}+... \right)
\end{align}
$$

or

$$
\mathbf{F}= Q \mathbf{E}
$$

where

$$
\mathbf{E}(\mathbf{r})= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}\frac{q_{i}}{\mathcal{R}_{i}^{2}}\vec{\mathcal{R}}_{i}.
$$

$\mathbf{E}$ is called **electric field** of the source charges. Notice that $\mathbf{E}$ is a function of position ($\mathbf{R}$) because the separation vectors $\vec{\mathcal{R}}_{i}$ depend on the location of the **field point** $P$. Also notice that it makes no reference to the test charge $Q$; the electric field is determined only by the configuration of the source charges. Physically, $\mathbf{E}(\mathbf{r})$ is the force per unit charge that would be exerted on a test charge if you were to place it at the point $P$.

So what *is* an electric field? Its not necessarily a physical thing. It should be thought of more as a mathematical object to allows us to work with electric fields for easily.

## Continuous Charge Distributions

The definition above works specifically for a discreet number of charges. However, if the charge is instead distributed continuously over some region, the sum is replaced by an integral:

$$
\mathbf{E}(\mathbf{r})= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int \frac{1}{\mathcal{R}^2}\hat{\mathcal{R}}dq.
$$

If the charge is spread out along a line, with charge per unit length $\lambda$, then $dq = \lambda dl'$, where $dl'$ is an element of length along the line ; if the charge is smeared out over a surface, with charge per unit area $\sigma$, then $dq = \sigma da'$. If the charge fills a volume, with charge per unit volume $\rho$, then $dq = \rho d \tau'$. Thus, the electric field of a charge distribution is

$$
\mathbf{E}(\mathbf{r})= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int \frac{f (\mathbf{r'})}{\mathcal{R}^2}\hat{\mathcal{R}}dx
$$

Where $f$ is the charge distribution, and $dx$ its integration variable. Here, $\hat{\mathbf{R}}$ is the vector from $dq$ to the field point $\mathbf{r}$.