# Divergence and Curl of Electrostatic Fields

## Field Lines, Flux, and Gauss's Law

Field lines are a useful way to represent the electric field. They allow for the drawing of more complicated fields that may otherwise be borderline impossible to draw using vector fields. Field lines begin at positive charges and end at negative charges. Field lines cannot end midair, nor can they cross. With all this in mind, drawing field lines is easy: just draw the lines in the neighborhood of each charge, and then connect them up or extend them to infinity.

In this model, the *flux* of $\mathbf{E}$ through a surface $\mathcal{S}$,

$$
\Phi_{E}\equiv \int_{\mathcal{S}}\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{a},
$$

is a measure of the "number of field lines" passing through $\mathcal{S}$. This is in quotes because in reality there are an infinity number of field lines. The flux is still useful however, because for a given sampling rate the flux is proportional to the number of field lines, and hence $\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{a}$ is proportional to the number of lines passing through the infinitesimal area $d \mathbf{a}$.

This suggests that the flux through any closed surface is a measure of the total charge inside. For field lines that originate on a positive charge must either pass out through the surface or also terminate on a negative charge inside. On the other hand, field lines originating outside the surface will contribute nothing to the total flux, as the field lines would pass in through one side and out through another side.

This is the essence of Gauss' law. Now we make it quantitative.  In the case of a point charge $q$ at the origin, the flux $\mathbf{E}$ through a spherical surface of radius $r$ is

$$
\oint \mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{a}= \int \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\left(\frac{q}{r^{2}}\hat{\mathbf{r}}\right) \cdot (r^{2}\sin \theta d \theta d \phi \hat{\mathbf{r}})= \frac{q}{\epsilon_{0}}.
$$

Notice this the radius of the sphere cancels out, for while the surface area goes up as $r^2$, the field goes down as $1/r^{2}$, so the product is constant. Any closed surface, whatever its shape, has a flux of $q/\epsilon_{0}$ for any charge inside it.

We can easily extend this to having multiple charges inside our volume; By the principle of superposition, we just add the fields vectorially:

$$
\mathbf{E}=\sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}\mathbf{E}_{i}.
$$

The flux through the surface is then

$$
\oint \mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{a}= \sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}\left(\oint \mathbf{E}_{i}\cdot d \mathbf{a}\right) = \sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}\left(\frac{q_{i}}{\epsilon_{0}}\right)
$$

for any closed surface. Then

$$
\oint \mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{a}= \frac{Q_{\text{enc}}}{\epsilon_{0}},
$$

Where $Q_{\text{enc}}$ is the total charge enclosed within the surface. This is, quantitatively, Gauss' law. Although it contains no information that was not already known, it is very much of magical power, as we shall see later.

As written, Gauss law is an integral equation, but we can turn it into a differential equation by applying the divergence theorem:

$$
\begin{align}
\oint_{\mathcal{S}} \mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{a}& =\int_{\mathcal{V}}(\nabla \cdot \mathbf{E})d \tau. \\
Q_{\text{enc}}& = \int_{\mathcal{V}}\rho d \tau \\
\int_{\mathcal{V}}(\nabla \cdot \mathbf{E})d \tau & = \int_{\mathcal{V}}\left(\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}\right) d \tau \\
\nabla \cdot \mathbf{E}& = \frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}.
\end{align}
$$

Where we write $Q_{\text{enc}}$ as the integral of its charge density. We can cancel out the integrals in the last line because as we've seen, Gauss' law holds for any volume.

## The Divergence of $E$

Let's calculate the divergence of $E$ directly now:

$$
\mathbf{E}(\mathbf{r})= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int \frac{\hat{\mathcal{R}}}{\mathcal{R}^{2}} \rho(\mathbf{r'})d \tau'.
$$

We can integrate over all space since $\rho= 0$ outside the region anyway. Remember that the $\mathbf{r}$-dependence inside $\mathcal{R}= \mathbf{r}-\mathbf{r'}$. We have

$$
\nabla \cdot \mathbf{E}= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int \nabla \cdot \left(\frac{\hat{\mathcal{R}}}{\mathcal{R}^{2}}\right) \rho (\mathbf{r'})d \tau'.
$$

Which is precisely the divergence of $1/r^{2}$, thus

$$
\nabla \cdot \mathbf{E}= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int 4 \pi \delta^{3}(\mathbf{r}-\mathbf{r'})\rho (\mathbf{r'})d \tau' = \frac{\rho (\mathbf{r})}{\epsilon_{0}}.
$$

Notice this is Gauss' law in differential form. We get the integral form by running the divergence theorem in reverse.

## The Curl of $E$

Let's start by calculating the curl of the field generated by a point charge at the origin. We know

$$
\mathbf{E}= \frac{q}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}^{2}}\hat{\mathcal{R}}.
$$

If you know what the vector field for a function that decays as $1/r^2$ looks like, then you can probably guess what the curl ought to be $(0)$. Obviously we will prove it, but it is a good first guess.

Let's calculate the line integral from some point $a$ to another point $b$ in spherical coordinates:

$$
\int_{a}^{b}\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{l}= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int_{a}^{b}\frac{q}{r^{2}}= \frac{-q}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}r}\Big|_{r_{a}}^{r_{b}}= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\left(\frac{q}{r_{a}}-\frac{q}{r_{b}}\right).
$$

where $r_{a}$ is the distance from the origin to the point $\mathbf{a}$ and $r_{b}$ is the distance from the origin to point $\mathbf{b}$.  Evidently, the path around a closed loop is $0$:

$$
\oint \mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{l}= 0
$$

And by Stoke's theorem,

$$
\nabla \times \mathbf{E}= \mathbf{0}
$$

While we only proved these equations for a point charge, the principle of superposition again lets us see that this still holds for charge distributions. On top of that, the choice of coordinates does not matter, so this naturally holds for all charges and charge distributions.