# Electric Potential

## Introduction to Potential

$\mathbf{E}$ is a very special kind of vector function: one whose curl is zero. We are going to exploit this property to turn problems that would normally be *vector* problems, to much simpler *scalar* problems.

Because $\nabla \times \mathbf{E}= 0$, the line integral from some point $a$ to another point $b$ is independent of the path taken. Because of this, we can define a function

$$
V (\mathbf{r})\equiv-\int_{\mathcal{O}}^{\mathbf{r}}\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{l},
$$

where $\mathcal{O}$ is some standard reference point. This means $V$ depends only on $\mathbf{r}$. This function is called the **electric potential**. The potential difference, then, is the difference between two potentials at $a$ and $b$:

$$
\begin{align}
V (\mathbf{b})-V (\mathbf{a})& = -\int_{\mathcal{O}}^{\mathbf{b}}\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{l}+ \int_{\mathcal{O}}^{\mathbf{a}}\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{l}\\
& =-\int_{\mathcal{O}}^{\mathbf{b}}\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{l}-\int_{\mathbf{a}}^{\mathcal{O}}\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{l}=-\int_{a}^{b}\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{l}.
\end{align}
$$

The fundamental theorem for gradients states that

$$
V (\mathbf{b}) -V (\mathbf{a})= \int_{a}^{b}(\nabla V)\cdot d \mathbf{l},
$$

So

$$
\int_{a}^{b}(\nabla V)\cdot d \mathbf{l}=-\int_{a}^{b}\mathbf{E}  \cdot d \mathbf{l}.
$$

Since this is true for *any* points $\mathbf{a}$ and $\mathbf{b}$, the integrands must be equal, and so

$$
\mathbf{E}=-\nabla V.
$$

## Notes on Potential

1. **Name:** Remember that potential and potential *energy* are different. That is all
2. **Advantage of the potential formulation:** If you know $V$, you can easily get $\mathbf{E}$ by taking the negative gradient of $V$: $\mathbf{E}=-\nabla V$.
3. **The reference point $\mathcal{O}$:** $\mathcal{O}$ is arbitrary. Changing reference points does not affect the potential difference, nor does it affect the gradient of $V$. Usually $\mathcal{O}$ is placed at infinity, except for when the charge distribution itself extends to infinity. This is only a problem in "textbook" problems, and the solution is to just place the reference point somewhere else.
4. **Potential obeys the superposition principle:** Pretty self-explanatory.
5. **Units:** the unit for potential difference is the *volt*.

## Poisson's Equation and Laplace's Equation

So what do the divergence and curl of the electric field look like in terms of the potential? Well, $\nabla \cdot \mathbf{E}= \nabla \cdot (-\nabla V)=-\nabla^{2}V$, so, sans the minus sign, the divergence of $\mathbf{E}$ is the Laplacian of $V$. By Gauss' law, we then have

$$
\nabla^{2}V =-\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}.
$$

This is known as **Poisson's equation**. In regions where there is no charge ($\rho = 0$), Poisson's equation reduces to **Laplace's equation**,

$$
\nabla^{2}V = 0.
$$

The curl of the electric field is zero, and by extension so is the potential. This makes sense since that was the condition that allowed us to write $\mathbf{E}$ in terms of $V$. We only need one differential equation to determine $V$, because $V$ is a scalar ; for $\mathbf{E}$ , we needed two.

## The Potential of a Localized Charge Distribution

So we've defined $V$ in terms of $V$. Great, but usually we want to go the other way around; finding $V$ might be easier, and then the electric field is a gradient away. Poisson's equation relates $V$ to $\rho$ but the relation is backwards. We need to invert Poisson's equation so we can find $V$ knowing $\rho$. We start, as always, with a point charge at the origin.

We know the potential for a point charge at the origin is

$$
\frac{q}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}r}.
$$

Where we've integrated the electric field from $\infty$ to $r$. In general, the potential of a point charge is

$$
V (\mathbf{r})= \frac{q}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}\mathcal{R}}
$$

Then the sum of a collection of charges is the sum of the potentials by superposition, and for a continuous charge distribution,

$$
V (\mathbf{r})= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int \frac{dq}{\mathcal{R}}.
$$

And for a volume charge,

$$
V (\mathbf{r})= \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\int \frac{\rho (\mathbf{r}')}{\mathcal{R}}d \tau'.
$$

This is what we've been looking for! Now we don't need to fuss with components.

## Boundary Conditions

For another time.