# Work and Energy in Electrostatics

## The Work it Takes to Move a Charge

Suppose you have a stationary charge configuration of course charges, and you want to match a test charge $Q$ from point $\mathbf{a}$ to point $\mathbf{b}$. How much work will you have to do? The electric force on $Q$ at any given time is $\mathbf{F}= Q \mathbf{E}$, and the force you must exert in opposition to said force is $-Q \mathbf{E}$. The work you do is therefore

$$
W = \int_{\mathbf{a}}^{\mathbf{b}}\mathbf{F}\cdot d \mathbf{l}= -Q\int_{\mathbf{a}}^{\mathbf{b}}\mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{l}= Q [V (\mathbf{b})-V (\mathbf{a})].
$$

Notice the answer is independent of the path you take. We would then call this force "conservative" in mechanics. This also gives us an expression for potential difference in terms of work:

$$
V (\mathbf{b})-V (\mathbf{a})= \frac{W}{Q}.
$$

So another way to describe potential difference is that the potential difference is equal to the work per unit charge required to carry a particle from $\mathbf{a}$ to $\mathbf{b}$. In particular, if you pant to bring $Q$ in from far away and stick it at point $\mathbf{r}$, the work you must do is

$$
W = Q [V (\mathbf{r})-V (\infty)],
$$

and with our reference point set at infinity as usual,

$$
W = QV (\mathbf{r})
$$

## The Energy of a Point Charge Distribution

How much work would it take to assemble an entire collection of point charges? Bring the charges, one by one, from far away. The TPUFRT charge, $q_{1}$, takes no work, because there is no field to fight against yet. Bringing in $q_{2}$ will cost you $q_{2}V_{1} (\mathbf{r}_{2})$, where $V_{1}(\mathbf{r}_{2})$ is the potential due to $q_{1}$ and $\mathbf{r}_{2}$ is the place we're putting $q_{2}$:

$$
W_{2}= \frac{q_{2}}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\left(\frac{q_{1}}{\mathcal{R}_{1, 2}}\right)
$$

where $\mathcal{R}_{1, 2}$ is the distance between the two charges once they're in position. Bringing in a third charge looks like

$$
W_{3}=  \frac{q_{3}}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\left(\frac{q_{1}}{\mathcal{R}_{1, 3}}+ \frac{q_{2}}{\mathcal{R}_{2, 3}} \right).
$$

And so on. The total work is then the sum of all the individual works from each point charge, and this can be very nicely summarized into a double sum:

$$
W = \frac{1}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}\sum\limits_{j > i}^{n}\frac{q_{i}q_{j}}{\mathcal{R}_{i, j}}.
$$

We emphasize that $j > i$ in one of the sums to avoid double-counting. You could also intentionally double count and just divide your answer by two, which results in the much nicer

$$
W = \frac{1}{8 \pi \epsilon_{0}}\sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}\sum\limits_{j \neq i}^{n}\frac{q_{i}q_{j}}{\mathcal{R}_{ij}}.
$$

We still have to avoid the $i = j$ case, but that's about it. We can factor out the $q_{i}$ from the second sum, and bring in the constant into the second sum:

$$
W = \frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}q_{i}\left(\sum\limits_{j \neq i}^{n}\frac{q_{j}}{4 \pi \epsilon_{0}\mathcal{R}_{ij}}\right).
$$

The term inside the sum is the potential at $\mathbf{r}_{i}$ due to all the other charges, thus,

$$
W = \frac{1}{2}\sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n}q_{i}V (\mathbf{r}_{i}).
$$

And that's how much work it takes to assemble a configuration of point charges.

## The Energy of a Continuous Charge Distribution

Once again, this becomes an integral.

$$
W = \frac{1}{2}\int \rho Vd \tau.
$$

This can be rewritten in terms of $\mathbf{E}$ alone by applying Gauss's law on $\rho$ and integrating by parts. The result is

$$
W = \frac{\epsilon_{0}}{2}\left(\int_{\mathcal{V}}E^{2}d \tau + \oint_{\mathcal{S}}V \mathbf{E}\cdot d \mathbf{a}\right).
$$

But we can integrate over *any* volume, so long as the contains all the charge. Because the $E^{2}$ term always increases, and the surface term decreases as we increase the volume, we might as well integrate over all space, where the second integral would go to zero. Then with are left with

$$
W = \frac{\epsilon_{0}}{2}\int E^{2}d \tau
$$

when you integrate over all space.