# Notation

The subject of vector geometry in general, and geometric algebra in particular, suffers from a profusion of notations and conventions. There is no single convention that is perfectly suited to the entire range of applications of geometric algebra. For example, many of the formulae and results given in this book are valid in vector spaces of arbitrary dimensions. these formulae invariably look neater if one does not embolden all of the vectors in the expression. For this reason would typically choose to write vectors in a lowercase italic script, *a*,  And more general multivectors in upper italic script, *M*. But in some applications, particularly mechanics and dynamics, we often reserve lowercase italic symbols for coordinates and scalars, and in these situations writing vectors in bold face is helpful. We aim to maintain a consistent notation within each chapter, and any new are distinct features are explained either at the start of the chapter or at their point of introduction.

Some conventions are universally adopted throughout this book, and for convenience we have gathered together a number of these here.

1. The geometric (or Clifford) algebra generated by the vector space of signature $(p,q)$ is denoted $\mathcal{G} (p, q)$. In the first three chapters we employ the abbreviations $\mathcal{G}_{2}$ and $\mathcal{G}_3$ for the Euclidean algebras $\mathcal{G} (2, 0)$ and $\mathcal{G}(3,0)$. In chapter 4 we use $\mathcal{G}_{n}$ to denote all algebras $\mathcal{G}(p,q)$  to total dimension $n$.
2. The geometric product of $A$ and $B$ is denoted by the juxtaposition, $AB$
3. The inner product is written with a centered dot, $A \cdot B$. The inner product is only employed between homogeneous multivectors.
4. The outer (exterior) product is written with a wedge, $A \wedge B$. The outer product is also only employed between homogenous multivectors.
5. Inner and outer products are always performed before geometric products. This lets us remove unnecessary brackets. For example, $a \cdot bc$should be read as $(a \cdot b)c$.
6. Angled brackets $\langle M \rangle_p$ are used to denote the result of projecting onto the terms in $M$ of grade $p$. The subscript zero is dropped for the projection onto the scalar part.
7. The reverse of the multivector $M$ is denoted either with a dagger, $M^{\dagger}$, are with a tilde, $\tilde{M}$. The latter is employed for applications in spacetime.
8. Linear functions are written in an upright font $\mathsf{F}(a)$ or $\mathsf{h}(a)$. This help to distinguish linear functions from multivectors. Some exceptions are encountered in later chapters, where  calligraphic symbols are used for certain tensors in gravitation. The adjoint of a linear function is denoted with a bar, $\bar{\mathsf{h}}(a)$.
9. Lie groups are written in capital, Roman font as in $\mathrm{SU} (n)$. The corresponding Lie algebra is written in lowercase, $\mathrm{su}(n)$ 