# Dirac Hamiltonian

The main issue of the Klein-Gordon equation is that we encounter negative energies for free particles. We also solved this problem for scalar fields. Dirac then attempted an alternative solution with led to the correct description of spin $1/2$ particles.

First, we note that this problem is not present in non-relativistic quantum mechanics due to the Schrödinger equation being linear in its time derivative. As such, Dirac noted, he should construct a Hamiltonian which would act as a sort of "square root" of the equation

$$
H^{2} = \mathbf{p}^{2} + m^{2}.
$$

^3e8167

The operator had to be linear and also square to the above, but such an operator can't be defined using only numbers or functions as coefficients; they should be matrices. Dirac then assumed that the "square root" of his equation should be of the form

$$
H = \gamma^{0}(\mathbf{\gamma}\cdot \mathbf{p}+ m),
$$

^5963eb

where $\gamma^{0}$ and $\gamma$ are both matrices.

Since both $H$ and $\mathbf{p}$ are Hermitian operators, it is clear that both $\gamma^{0}\mathbf{\gamma}$ and $\gamma^{0}$ must also be Hermitian.

Squaring both sides and comparing with [[#^3e8167]], we obtain the following relations:

$$
\begin{align}
\comm{\gamma^{0}\gamma^{i}}{\gamma^{0}\gamma^{j}}_{+} & = 2 \delta^{ij} \\[1 em]
\comm{\gamma^{0}\gamma^{i}}{\gamma^{0}}_{+} & = 0 \\[1 em]
\left(\gamma^{0} \right)^{2} & = 1.
\end{align}
$$

^1db42b

This can all be neatly expressed in one line:

$$
\comm{\gamma^{\mu}}{\gamma^{\nu}}_{+} = 2 g^{\mu \nu},
$$

with $g^{\mu \nu}$ the inverse metric. As this is a matrix equation, there is an implied identity matrix in the right hand side.

All these conditions are satisfied if the $\gamma^{\mu}$'s are $4 \times 4$ matrices. There are also **not** tensors; they are constant matrices.

> [! info]+
> The $\gamma$-matrices are all trace-less. That is
> $$\mathrm{Tr} \; \gamma^{\mu}= 0$$
> for all $\mu$.

We can now construct six antisymmetric matrices using the $\gamma$-matrices:

$$
\sigma^{\mu \nu} = \frac{i}{2}\comm{\gamma^{\mu}}{\gamma^{\nu}}_{-} = -\sigma^{\nu \mu}.
$$

These $\sigma$-matrices are related to the spin angular momentum of fields that obey the Dirac equation, i.e. particles with $1/2$ integer spin. We can now define the matrix

$$
\begin{align}
\gamma^{5} = \gamma_{5} & = i \gamma^{0}\gamma^{1}\gamma^{2}\gamma^{3} \\[1 em]
& = \frac{i}{4!}\epsilon_{\mu \nu \lambda \rho}\gamma^{\mu}\gamma^{\nu}\gamma^{\lambda}\gamma^{\rho},
\end{align}
$$

where $\epsilon_{\mu \nu \lambda \rho}$ is basically a 4-dimensional Levi-Civita symbol (see [[PHYS 495 QFT.pdf#page=68|PHYS 495 QFT, p.49]]).

With all this in place, we now have a 16-dimensional space of matrices:

$$
\Gamma = \set{  1, \gamma^{\mu}, \sigma^{\mu \nu}, \gamma^{5}\gamma^{\mu}, \gamma^{5} }.
$$

Since these must span the space, the matrices must then be at least $4 \times 4$.

As we established, $\gamma^{0}$ and $\gamma^{0}\gamma^{i}$ are Hermitian operators. It then follows that

$$
\begin{align}
\left(\gamma^{i}\right)^{\dagger} & = \left(\gamma^{i}\left(\gamma^{0} \right)^{2} \right)^{\dagger} \\[1 em]
& = \gamma^{0\dagger} \;\left(\gamma^{i}\gamma^{0} \right)^{\dagger} \\[1 em]
& = \gamma^{0}\gamma^{i}\gamma^{0} = -\gamma^{i},
\end{align}
$$

i.e. the matrices $\gamma^{i}$ are anti-Hermitian. The last relation is obtained from [[4.1#^1db42b|the second relation]]. We can again use a more compact notation and say

>[!info]+
>$$
>(\gamma^{\mu})^{\dagger} = \gamma^{0}\gamma^{\mu}\gamma^{0}.
>$$

It should be immediately clear that the specific form of the $\gamma$-matrices is not unique. In fact, for any unitary matrix $U$, we can define another set $\set{  \tilde{\gamma}^{\mu} }$ by

$$
\tilde{\gamma}^{\mu} = U \gamma^{\mu}U^{\dagger}
$$

which also satisfies the same equations. For this reason, we will refrain from using any one explicit representation of the $\gamma$-matrices, except for the sake of constructing explicit solutions.