# Dirac Equation

Using the Hamiltonian derived in the [[4.1#^5963eb|previous section]], we can write the equation of motion of $\psi$ as

$$
i \pdv{t}\psi (x) = \gamma^{0}(-i \mathbf{\gamma}\cdot \nabla + m) \psi (x).
$$

We can put this into a more familiar form by left-multiplying by $\gamma^{0}$ to obtain

$$
(i \gamma^{\mu}\partial_{\mu}-m)\psi (x) = 0.
$$

^94e405

We now introduce the so-called *slash* notation — for any 4-vector $a^{\mu}$, we write

$$
\cancel{a} \equiv \gamma^{\mu}a_{\mu} = \gamma_{\mu}a^{\mu}.
$$

The Dirac equation then takes the form

$$
(i \cancel{ \partial}-m)\psi (x) = 0.
$$

^10959d

It follows that, since the $\gamma^{\mu}$'s are $4  \times 4$ matrices, $\psi (x)$ must be a column matrix with 4 entries. Naturally, since the $\gamma$ are not unique, neither is $\psi(x)$. If some $\tilde{ \psi}(x)$ satisfies [[#^94e405|our Dirac equation]], it then follows that

$$
\tilde{ \psi}(x) = U \psi (x).
$$

A very important condition is that the Dirac equation **must** be relativistically covariant. Because of this, the Lorentz transformation property of $\psi (x)$ is fixed.

Let us assume that the Dirac equation is satisfied in a different frame of reference. Then

$$
(i \gamma^{\mu}\partial_{\mu}' -m)\psi' (x') = 0,
$$

with $x'^{\mu} = \Lambda^{\mu}_{\nu}x^{\nu}$. Assuming the relation between $\psi' (x')$ and $\psi (x)$ is linear, we then have

$$
\psi' (x') = S (\Lambda)\psi (x).
$$

Putting this into our primed Dirac equation and multiplying on the left by $S^{-1}$, we get

$$
S^{-1}(\Lambda)\gamma^{\mu}\Lambda_{\mu}^{\nu}S (\Lambda) = \gamma^{\nu}.
$$

^fc78c4

## Infinitesimal Lorentz Transformation

The infinitesimal Lorentz transformation is given by

$$
\Lambda_{\mu \nu} = g_{\mu \nu} + \omega_{\mu \nu},
$$

^72434b

with $\omega_{\mu \nu} = -\omega_{\nu \mu}$. Since the transformation is infinitesimal, we want $S (\Lambda)$ to be linear in $\omega_{\mu \nu}$, as well as reduce to the identity transformation for $\omega_{\mu \nu} = 0$. The small order expansion is

$$
S (\Lambda) = 1 - \frac{i}{4}\beta_{\mu \nu}\omega^{\mu \nu},
$$

^76147d

where $\beta_{\mu \nu}$ are some antisymmetric  $4 \times 4$ matrices. It then follows that

$$
S^{-1}(\Lambda) = 1 + \frac{i}{4}\beta_{\mu \nu}\omega^{\mu \nu}.
$$

Putting these into our equation for [[4.2#^fc78c4|$\gamma^{\nu}$]] and dropping higher order terms, we find

$$
\comm{\gamma_{\mu}}{\beta_{\lambda \rho}}_{-} = 2 i (g_{\mu \lambda}\gamma_{\rho}-g_{\mu \rho}\gamma_{\lambda}).
$$

The matrices $\beta_{ \mu \nu}$ must satisfy these conditions. It is easy to check that this condition is satisfied by the $\sigma_{\mu \nu}$ matrices.

For infinitesimal transformations, the Dirac equation is covariant if $\psi$ transforms by $S (\Lambda)$ as given [[#^76147d|above]].

To obtain the finite Lorentz transformation, we simply exponentiate the Lorentz boost, for which we then get

$$
\psi' (x') = \exp \left(-\frac{i}{4}\sigma_{\mu \nu}\omega^{\mu \nu} \right)\psi (x).
$$

^d1fbba

This $\psi (x)$ is not a scalar, vector, or even a tensor. This is a column vector whose components mix among themselves according to the [[#^d1fbba|above]]. These objects are called **spinors**.

Recall that the angular momentum operators $J_{\mu \nu}$ generate the transformations

$$
\psi' (x) = \left(1-\frac{i}{2}J_{\mu \nu}\omega^{\mu \nu} \right)\psi (x).
$$

This is what we have called $\bar{ \delta}$ in [[2.4#^4519dc|2.4]]. Using this, as well as the [[#^72434b|initial]] Lorentz transformation matrix, we can write

$$
\psi' (x') = \psi' (x) + \omega^{\mu \nu}x_{\nu}\partial_{\mu}\psi' (x).
$$

Using the linearized forms of $\psi' (x')$ and $\psi' (x)$, we obtain

$$
J_{\mu \nu} = i (x_{\mu}\partial_{\nu}-x_{\nu}\partial_{\mu}) + \frac{1}{2}\sigma_{\mu \nu}.
$$

^689899

The first term should be a familiar expression of the orbital angular momentum, but we now have a second term. This shows that the solutions to the Dirac equation carry some intrinsic angular momentum, otherwise known as *spin*.