# Plane Wave Solutions to the Dirac Equation

## Positive and Negative Energy Spinors

For a single particle, the [[4.2#^94e405|Dirac equation]] would be a wavefunction. Funnily enough, although Dirac wanted his solution to avoid negative energies, they are still present even in his equation. Let us assume a plane wave solution in the rest frame of the particle to show that this is true.

For such a solution, the time dependence is of the form $e^{-iEt}$. We then see from [[4.2#^94e405|the Dirac equation]] that the eigenvalue E should satisfy

$$
(\gamma^{0}E-m)\psi (x) = 0,
$$

but $(\gamma^{0})^{2} = 1$, so the eigenvalues of $\gamma^{0}$ can be $+ 1$ *or* $-1$. As such, our solution to the eigenvalue equation above is

$$
E = \pm m.
$$

On top of that, there will be two independent eigenvectors for each sign of the eigenvalue, but that is expected, as $\psi$ is a 4 component object.

Thus, both positive and negative energies will occur in a single particle interpretation of the Dirac equation. We can represent these solutions for a general value of the 3-momentum $\mathbf{p}$ in the form

$$
\begin{align}
\psi (x) \sim
\begin{cases}
u_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{-ip \cdot x} \\[1 em]
v_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{ip \cdot x}
\end{cases}
\end{align}
$$

up to normalization factors. The label $s$ is an index, indicating 2 independent solutions. The $u$-solutions represent the positive energy solutions, with momentum $\mathbf{p}$ and energy $E_{p}= \sqrt{\mathbf{p}^{2}+ m^{2}}$, while the $v-$solutions represent the negative energy solutions, with momentum $-\mathbf{p}$ and energy $-E_{p}$.

If we now substitute this into our [[4.2#^94e405|equation]], we obtain two relations:

$$
\begin{align}
(\cancel{ p} - m)u_{s}(\mathbf{p}) & = 0 \\[1 em]
 (\cancel{ p} + m)v_{s}(\mathbf{p}) & = 0.
\end{align}
$$

^1f29c6

Spinors do not behave well under Hermitian conjugation. Instead, we use what is called *Dirac Conjugation*. This is defined by

$$
\bar{ \psi} \equiv \psi^{\dagger}\gamma^{0}. 
$$

This does in fact behave well. Using this conjugation, it is easy to see that the above can also be written as

$$
\begin{align}
\bar{ u}_{s} (\mathbf{p}) (\cancel{ p}-m) & = 0 \\[1 em]
\bar{ v}_{s} (\mathbf{p}) (\cancel{ p}+ m) & = 0.
\end{align}
$$

The normalization conditions are then given by

$$
\begin{align}
u^{\dagger}_{r}(\mathbf{p})u_{s}(\mathbf{p}) = v^{\dagger}_{r}(\mathbf{p})v_{s}(\mathbf{p}) & = 2 E_{p}\delta_{rs} \\[1 em]
v^{\dagger}_{r}(\mathbf{p})u_{s}(-\mathbf{p}) = u^{\dagger}_{r}(\mathbf{p})v_{s}(-\mathbf{p}) & = 0
\end{align}
$$

^2bd6bc

## Explicit Solutions

Seen in the book, [[PHYS 495 QFT.pdf#page=76|PHYS 495 QFT, p.57]].

