# Projection Operators

Now that we have multiple solutions, we want a way to "project out" an appropriate solution from our space of solutions, given some particular situation. To do so, we introduce the notion of **projection operators**.

## Positive and Negative Energy States

First, note that for any two vectors $a$ and $b$, the following relation holds:

$$
\cancel{ a}\cancel{ b} = 2 a \cdot b - \cancel{ b}\cancel{ a}.
$$

In particular, this implies

$$
\cancel{ a}\cancel{ a} = a^{2}.
$$

We can then define a projection operator, which we shall call the energy projection operator $\Lambda_{\pm}$ by

$$
\Lambda_{\pm} = \frac{\pm\cancel{ p}+ m}{2 m}.
$$

$\Lambda_{\pm}$ has the following properties:

1. $\Lambda^{2}_{\pm}= \Lambda_{\pm}$.
2. $\Lambda_{+}\Lambda_{-} = \Lambda_{-}\Lambda_{+} = 0$.
3. $\Lambda_{+} + \Lambda_{-} = 1$.

Using our [[4.3#^1f29c6|$u$ and $v$ representation]] of the wavefunction, we see that the plane wave solutions for positive and negative energy are in fact (right) eigenstates of $\Lambda_{\pm}$:

$$
\begin{align}
\Lambda_{+}(\mathbf{p})u_{s}(\mathbf{p}) & = u_{s}(\mathbf{p}) \\[1 em]
\Lambda_{-}(\mathbf{p})v_{s}(\mathbf{p}) & = v_{s}(\mathbf{p}).
\end{align}
$$

Furthermore,

$$
\begin{align}
\Lambda_{+}v_{s}(\mathbf{p}) = \Lambda_{-}(\mathbf{p})v_{s}(\mathbf{p}) = 0.
\end{align}
$$

The same holds true with $\bar{ u}$ and $\bar{ v}$, but multiplied on the left ("left" eigenstates).

## Helicity

The helicity of a fermion is the spin when it is measured along its direction of motion. One can have positive or negative helicity, in units of $\frac{1}{2}\hbar$.

Recall that the [[4.2#^689899|angular momentum]] equation, the second term $\frac{1}{2}\sigma_{\mu \nu}$ is the spin operator for fermions. We may define a 3-vector

$$
\mathbf{\Sigma} \equiv (\sigma^{23}, \sigma^{31}, \sigma^{12}).
$$

We can project this vector along the direction of motion of the fermion:

$$
\mathbf{\Sigma}_{\mathbf{p}} = \frac{\mathbf{\Sigma}\cdot \mathbf{p}}{\mathrm{p}},
$$

which has eigenvalues $\pm1$.

With this, we may now define the helicity projection operators,

$$
\Pi_{\pm}\mathbf{p} = \frac{1}{2}(1 \pm \mathbf{\Sigma}_{\mathbf{p}}).
$$

These operators follow the same three properties as the energy projection operators. They also commute with the energy projection operators, i.e.

$$
\comm{\Lambda_{+}\mathbf{p}}{\Pi_{\pm}(\mathbf{p})} = \comm{\Lambda_{-}(\mathbf{p})}{\Pi_{\pm}(\mathbf{p})} = 0.
$$

All of these relations are representation-independent, and in particular the last relation shows that we can choose common eigenstates for both the $\Lambda_{\pm}$ and $\Pi_{\pm}$ operators.

As an example, if the motion of the fermion is in the $z$-direction, then the spinors given before in the textbook satisfy

$$
\begin{align}
\Sigma_{p}u_{s}(\mathbf{p}) = su_{s}(\mathbf{p}) \\[1 em]
\Sigma_{p}v_{s}(\mathbf{p}) = -sv_{s}(\mathbf{p}),
\end{align}
$$

Where $s = \pm$. Any other direction can be represented by a linear combination of the two $u$-spinors and the two $v$-spinors. Note that, for $u$-spinors, the subscript $+/-$ represents the helicity, while for the $v$-spinors, it is the opposite.

## Chirality and Others

In general, we can construct a projection operator with any operator that squares to the identity. That is, if $Q$ is an operator such that $Q^{2} = 1$, then we may define a projection operator $P_{\pm}$ by

$$
P_{\pm} = \frac{1}{2}(1 \pm Q).
$$

These operators all obey the three properties of the energy projection operators.

There is one more "obvious" operator we can construct. It is built using the fact that $\gamma^{5}$ squares to the identity. We define them by

$$
\begin{align}
\mathrm{L} = \frac{1}{2}(1-\gamma^{5}) \\[1 em]
\mathrm{R} = \frac{1}{2}(1 + \gamma^{5}).
\end{align}
$$

These are called the chirality projection operators, and they are closely related to the helicity projection operators. In fact the helicity operators become the chirality operators in the limit $m\to 0.$

## Spin Projection Operators

As we have mentioned already, the helicity projection operators can project the spin of a particle in the direction of the 3-momentum. This is true in every case *except in the rest frame*. For that, we need a different set of operators, called the spin projection operators.

Say we want to project the spin states in a certain direction, denoted by a 3-vector $\hat{ s}$. We can then define a 4-vector $n^{\mu}$, whose components are given by

$$
\begin{align}
n^{0} & = \frac{\mathbf{p}\cdot \hat{ s}}{m} \\[1 em]
\mathbf{n} & = \hat{ s} + \frac{(\mathbf{p}\cdot \hat{ s})\mathbf{p}}{m (E + m)}.
\end{align}
$$

$n^{\mu}$ satisfies the relations

$$
\begin{align}
 p^{\mu}n_{\mu} & = 0 \\[1 em]
n^{\mu}n_{\mu} & = -1.
\end{align}
$$

Thanks to the second property, the operator $\gamma^{5}\cancel{ n}$ squares to the identity, with means we can construct two projection operators

$$
\begin{align}
 P_{\uparrow} & = \frac{1}{2}(1 + \gamma^{5}\cancel{ n}) \\[1 em]
P_{\downarrow} & = \frac{1}{2} (1 - \gamma^{5}\cancel{ n}).
\end{align}
$$

Examples of the spin projection operator are given in [[PHYS 495 QFT.pdf#page=82|PHYS 495 QFT, p.63]].