# Lagrangian for a Dirac Field

Despite Dirac's attempt, the single particle solution to the Dirac equation still yields negative energies. We must now take a field-theoretic approach, for which we first need a Lagrangian.

The Dirac equation can be derived from the following Lagrangian:

$$
\mathcal{L} = \overline{\psi}(i \cancel{ \partial}-m)\psi
$$

We can put the spinor components directly, which reads

$$
\mathcal{L} = \overline{\psi}_{\alpha}\left( i (\gamma^{\mu})_{\alpha \beta}\partial_{\mu}-  m \delta_{\alpha \beta}\right)\psi_{\beta}.
$$

We consider the case where $\psi$ is a complex field. We can treat $\psi$ and $\overline{\psi}$  is linearly independent, since $\overline{ \psi}$ is strictly made up of linear combinations of $\psi^{\dagger}$. The Euler-Lagrange equation then reads

$$
\partial_{\mu}\left(\pdv{\mathcal{L}}{\left(\partial_{\mu}\overline{ \psi}_{\alpha} \right)} \right) = \pdv{\mathcal{L}}{\overline{ \psi}_{\alpha}}.
$$

Clearly, the left hand side is $0$, as there are no terms in the Lagrangian that explicitly depend on $\partial_{\mu}\overline{ \psi}_{\alpha}$. From this, we obtain the [[4.2#^10959d|Dirac equation]]. We know the action is a real number, and a functional of the fields. The Lagrangian is then also a real function in classical field theory. But in quantum mechanics, the fields are operators, and so the Lagrangian *should* be Hermitian. It is very easy to see that our current Lagrangian is *not* Hermitian:

$$
\begin{align}
\left(i \overline{ \psi}\gamma^{\mu} \partial_{\mu}\psi \right)^{\dagger} & = -i (\partial_{\mu}\psi)^{\dagger}\gamma^{\mu\dagger}\gamma_{0}\psi \\[1 em]
& = -i (\partial_{\mu}\overline{ \psi})\gamma^{\mu} \psi.
\end{align}
$$

This is very much not equal to itself. This is not a problem in the end, as we shall see. We may instead use this Lagrangian:

$$
\mathcal{L}' = \frac{i}{2}\overline{ \psi}\gamma^{\mu} \partial_{\mu}\psi -\frac{i}{2}(\partial_{\mu}\overline{ \psi})\gamma^{\mu} \psi -m \overline{ \psi}\psi,
$$

but notice that

$$
\mathcal{L} -\mathcal{L}' = \partial_{\mu}\left( \frac{i}{2}\overline{ \psi}\gamma^{\mu} \psi \right).
$$

The two Lagrangians differ only by a total divergence, which means the two Lagrangians are equivalent. We therefore opt to use the simpler Lagrangian.

The Dirac Lagrangian is invariant under the transformations

$$
\psi \to e^{-iq \theta}\psi,
$$

and the Noether current is

$$
j^{\mu} = q \overline{ \psi}\gamma^{\mu} \psi.
$$

The conserved charge is then given by

$$
Q = q \int \overline{ \psi}\gamma^{0}\psi \dd[3]{x} = q \int \psi^{\dagger}\psi \dd[3]{x}
$$