The next step is clearly to Fourier decompose the field as with the scalar case. Just like in the scalar case, we write the filed as an integral over the momentum space of the plane wave solutions, using the creation and annihilation operators as its coefficients:

$$
\psi (x) = \int\frac{\dd[3]{p}}{\sqrt{(2 \pi)^{3}2  E_{p}}}  \sum\limits_{s = 1, 2}\left(f_{s}(\mathbf{p})u_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{-ip \cdot x} + \widehat{f}_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p})v_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{ip \cdot x} \right).
$$

Clearly, this implies 

$$
\overline{\psi}(x) = \int\frac{\dd[3]{p}}{\sqrt{(2 \pi)^{3}2 E_{p}}} \sum\limits_{s = 1, 2} \left(f_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p})\overline{u}_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{ip \cdot x} \widehat{f}_{s}(\mathbf{p}) \overline{v}_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{-ip \cdot x} \right).
$$

We can then write the (total) Hamiltonian as

$$
\begin{align}
H & = \int \frac{\delta L}{\delta \dot{\psi}_{\alpha}(x)}\dot{\psi}_{\alpha}(x) - L \dd[3]{x} \\[1 em]
& = \int \bar{\psi}(-i \gamma \cdot \nabla + m)\psi \dd[3] {x}.
\end{align}
$$

We can apply the operator $(-i \gamma \cdot \nabla + m)$ on $\psi (x)$ by noting that

$$
\begin{align}
(-i \gamma \cdot \nabla + m)u_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{-ip \cdot x} & = (\gamma \cdot \mathbf{p} + m)u_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{-ip \cdot x} \\[1 em]
& = \gamma_{0}E_{p}u_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{-ip \cdot x},
\end{align}
$$

Where we have used the [[4.3#^1f29c6|definition]] of the $u-$spinors for the last step. Similarly for $v_{s}$:

$$
(-i \gamma \cdot \nabla + m)v_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{ip \cdot x} = -\gamma_{0}E_{p}v_{s}(\mathbf{p})e^{ip \cdot x}.
$$

Substituting both of these into our total Hamiltonian, and canceling the terms involving $u^{\dagger}v$ and $v^{\dagger}u$ — which are zero due to the [[4.3#^2bd6bc|normalization conditions]] — we obtain

$$
H = \int E_{p}\sum\limits_{s = 1, 2}\left[f_{s}^{ \dagger}(\mathbf{p})f_{s}\mathbf{p}-\hat{ f}_{s}\mathbf{p}\hat{ f}_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p})\right].
$$

Unfortunately, this Hamiltonian gives negative energy eigenvalues, and we can't solve this using our current definition of normal ordering. Instead, we must define our normal ordering such that it obeys the *anti*-commutation relations instead. With this, the normal-ordered Hamiltonian is

$$
:H: \quad = \int E_{p}\sum\limits_{s = 1, 2}\left[f_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p})f_{s}(\mathbf{p}) + \hat{ f}_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p})\hat{_{s}}(\mathbf{p}) \right].
$$

The Noether charge in normal ordered form is now

$$
\begin{align}
:Q: \quad & = q \int :\psi^{\dagger}\psi: \dd[3]{x} \\[1 em]
& = q \int \sum\limits_{s = 1, 2}\left[ f^{\dagger}_{s}(\mathbf{p})f_{s}(\mathbf{p})-\hat{ f}_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p})\hat{ f}_{s}(\mathbf{p}) \right].
\end{align}
$$

Just as in the complex scalar case, the Noether charge for $f^{\dagger}$ is opposite to the charge of $\hat{ f}^{\dagger}$, making the former ones particles and the latter antiparticles.

From normal ordering, any commutation not expressed by the anticommutation relations is zero, meaning commuting $f_{s}^{\dagger}$ with itself will vanish. As such,

$$
f_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p})f_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p}) = \hat{ f}_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p})\hat{ f}_{s}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{p}) = 0.
$$

This is exactly the **Pauli exclusion principle**; We can't create two particles (or antiparticles) with the same spin and same momentum.

We can also define the Fock space for fermions by defining the vacuum as

$$
f_{s}(\mathbf{p})\ket{ 0} = 0, \quad \hat{ f}_{s}(\mathbf{p})\ket{ 0} = 0 
$$

for all $\mathbf{p}$ and $s$. We can then make states that contain particles by simply acting on the vacuum by $f^{\dagger}$ and $\hat{ f}^{\dagger}$. We now have the following commutation relations:

$$
\begin{align}
\comm{H}{f_{r}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{k})}_{-} & = E_{k}f^{\dagger}, \\[1 em]
\comm{H}{\hat{ f}_{r}^{\dagger}(\mathbf{k})}_{-} & = E_{k}\hat{ f}^{\dagger}.
\end{align}
$$

This imply that $f_{ r}^{\dagger}$ and $\hat{ f}_{r}^{\dagger}$ both create positive energy states only.

# Talk About Helicities if You Must

