# Vector Spaces

Linear (or vector) spaces are at the heart of much of geometric algebra. Here we summarize some of these properties, which we'll assume throughout the book. In this section we will talk about *vector* spaces, as this is the more common term. For all other occurrences, we prefer to use the term *linear* space. This is because the term "vector" has a very specific meaning within linear algebra (as the grade-1 elements of the algebra).

## Properties

Vector spaces are defined in terms of two objects. These are the vectors, which can often visualized as directions in space, and the scalars, which are usually taken to be the real numbers. The vector have a simple addition operation rule with the follow obvious properties:
1. Addition is commutative
$$a + b = b + a$$
2. Addition is associative:
$$a + (b + c)= (a + b)+ c$$
3.  There is an identity element, denoted 0:
$$a + 0 = a$$
4. Every element has an inverse $-a$:
$$a + (-a)= 0$$

 Vector spaces also contain a multiplication operation between scalars and vectors. This has the property that for any scalar $\lambda$ and vector $a$, the product $\lambda a$ is also a member of the vector space. This is literally just the scaling that we are already familiar with. This is also known as the dilation operation. The following properties hold for any scalars $\lambda, \;\mu$ and vectors $a$ and $b$

1. $\lambda (a + b)= \lambda a + \lambda b$
2. $(\lambda + \mu)a = \lambda a + \mu a$
3. $(\lambda \mu)a = \lambda (\mu a)$
4. If $1 \lambda = \lambda$ for all scalars $\lambda$ then $1a = a$ for all vectors $a$.

The preceding set of rules serve to define a vector space completely. The two following definitions will be useful later on:
1. Two vector spaces are said to be * isomorphic* if their elements can be placed in a one-to-one correspondence which preserves sums, and there is a one-to-one correspondence between the scalars which preserves sums and products.
2. If $\mathcal{U}$ and $\mathcal{V}$ are two vector spaces (sharing the same scalars) and all the elements are $\mathcal{U}$ are contained in $\mathcal{V}$, then $\mathcal{U}$ is said to form a subspace of $\mathcal{V}$.


## Bases and Dimension

The concept of dimension is intuitive for simple vector spaces — lines are one-dimensional, planes are two-dimensional, and so on. Equipped with the axioms of a vector space we can proceed to a formal definition of the dimension of a vector space. Some terms are defined first:

1. A vector $b$ is said to be a linear combination of the vectors $a_{1},...,a_{n}$ if scalars $\lambda_{1},... ,\lambda_{n}$ can be found such that
$$b = \lambda_{1}a_{1}+... + \lambda_{n}a_{n}= \sum\limits_{i = 1}^{in}\lambda_{i}a_i.$$

2. A set of vectors $\{a_{1},...,a_{n}\}$ is said to be linearly dependent if scalars $\lambda_{1},..., \lambda_{n}$ (not all zero) can be found such that
$$\lambda_{1}a_{1}+... \lambda_{n}a_{n}= 0.$$
If such a set of scalars cannot be found, the vectors are said to be linearly independent.
3. A set of vectors $\{a_{1},..., a_{n}\}$ is said to span a vector space $\mathcal{V}$ if every element of $\mathcal{V}$ with be expressed as a linear combination of the set.
4. A set of sectors which are both linearly independent and span the space $\mathcal{V}$ are said to form a basis for $\mathcal{V}$.

The axioms for a vector space define an abstract mathematical entity which is already well equipped for studying problems in geometry. In so doing we are not compelled to interpret the elements of the vector space as displacements. Often different interpretations can be attached to isomorphic spaces, lead leading to different types of geometry (affine, projective, finite, etc.). For most problems in physics, however, to need to be able to do more than just add the elements of a vector space, we need to multiply them in various ways as well. This is necessary to formalize concepts such as angles and lengths and to construct higher dimensional surfaces from simple vectors.

Constructing suitable products was a major concern of nineteenth century mathematicians, and the concepts they introduced are integral to modern mathematical physics. In this chapter we study some of the basic concepts that were successfully formulated in this period. Chapter 2 will introduce the culmination of this work, Clifford's *geometric product*.