# Polarization

## Dielectrics

We now start our study of electric fields in matter. Naturally, every substance behaves differently and do not respond in the same way to is electrostatic fields. We can, however, still classify most everyday objects into one of two classes: *conductors* and *insulators* (or *dielectrics*). We have already dealt with conductors, which essentially have an unlimited supply of charges that are free to move around through the material. What this means is that no electron is bound to any particular nucleus. In dielectrics, the electrons are bound to their nuclei, and so have limited movement. There are *two* principal mechanisms by which electric fields can distort the charge distribution of a dielectric atom or molecule: *stretching* and *rotating*.

## Induced Dipoles

What happens to an atom when it is placed in an electric field $\mathbf{E}$? Initially one might think nothing would happen. After all, the atom is not charged, but that is incorrect. Although the atom as a whole is not charged, there is a positively charged core and a negatively charged electron cloud surrounding it. These two regions of charge within the atom are influenced by the field: the nucleus is pushed in the direction of the field, while the electron cloud is pushed in the opposite destruction. In principle, if the field is large enough, it can rip the electrons from the nucleus, ionizing it (at which point the substance becomes a conductor). With less extreme fields, an equilibrium is soon established. The two opposing forces reach a balance, leaving the atom *polarized*, with plus charge shifted slightly one way, and minus the other. The atom now has a tiny dipole moment $\mathbf{p}$, which points in the same direction as $\mathbf{E}$. Typically, this induced dipole moment is approximately proportional to the field (as long as the field is not too strong):

$$
\begin{align}
\mathbf{p} = \alpha \mathbf{E}
\end{align}
$$

The constant of proportionality is called *atomic polarizablity*. Its value depends in the detailed structure of the atom in question.

For molecules the situation is not quite so simple, because frequently they polarize more readily in some directions than in others. Carbon dioxide, for instance, has a polarizablity of $4.5 \times 10^{-40}C^{2} \cdot m/N$ Chen you apply the field along the axis of the molecule, but only $2 \times 10^{-40}$ for fields perpendicular to the direction. When the field is at some *angle* to the axis, you must multiply each by the pertinent polarizablity:

$$
\mathbf{p} = \alpha_{\perp}\mathbf{E}_{\perp}+ \alpha_{||}\mathbf{E}_{||}
$$