# Introduction

Office hours:  Tuesday 14:00 — 16:00
_or_ email (iboettch can@ualberta.ca)
_or_ before lecture

Book: " Thermodynamics"- by Fermi

Assignments: 35%
Midterm: 15%
Final: 50%

Final will be written and take three hours

Lecture notes are in his homepage

# What is thermodynamics?

Thermodynamics is mainly concerned with the transformations of heat into mechanical work, and the opposite transformations of mechanical work into heat.

But what *are* work and heat?

Work is a relatively well understood concept from mechanics and electrodynamics. It is less obvious what *heat* is. We all have an intuitive idea of what heat is. For a long time, the belief was that heat is some sort of fluid whose total amount is invariable, and heating of a body is transfer of this fluid from one body to another. Only in the mid-1800's, with WHOPB the theory of thermodynamics was developed, did it crystallize that heat is a form of energy, and that heat and mechanical work are equivalent.

Thermodynamics is a phenomenological theory. Thermodynamics is very much based on observations. It doesn't care much about the fact that fluids are made of particles. This means that it formulates a few basic postulates based on experimental evidence and derives conclusions these postulates. It does not make (or need!) any assumptions about the microscopic mechanisms underlying the phenomena observed.

Insight into the microscopic mechanisms is often very useful and more satisfying, pure thermodynamics can be rather abstract. The kinetic theory of gases explains the equivalence. Hued and wok by reducing all thermal processes to the disordered motion of large numbers of atoms and molecules. More generally, the laws of thermodynamics can be derived very satisfactorily from statistical mechanics, which also accounts for quantum mechanical effects.

# Historical context

1760 — 1840:  Industrial revolution:  Transition from hand production to machines

1710 — 1770-  Steam engines

1780's:  Electric batteries

1800 — 1850: Steam and electric locomotives, railways

 Post 1850: Use of refined petroleum as fuel or in machines
Internal combustion engines

1886: Cars

1824:  Second law of thermodynamics puts limitations on converting heat into work.

1840's: First law of thermodynamics: equivalence of heat and work, conservation of energy.

1850's:  Definition of entropy

1870's:  Kinetic their and statistical mechanics

1912: Third law of thermodynamics: entropy at zero temperature, needs quantum mechanics