# Thermodynamic Systems


## Thermodynamic Variables

Typical systems we consider in thermodynamics are

1. A block of iron
2.  A bucket of water
3. a balloon filled with helium gas

These systems have two important aspects in common. They

1. Occupy volume much larger than the extension of their constituent particles
2.  Contain a large number of these constituent particles.

Systems with properties 1 and 2 are called *macroscopic*. this is in contrast to microscopic systems, which are typically tiny and contain only a few particles

In each example system, we could try to describe the physics by solving Newton's equation of motion for each of the N particles. Complete information then requires to determine the position $\vec{x}_{i=}(x_{i}, y_{i}, z_{i})$and velocity $\vec{v}= (x_{i}, y_{i}, z_{i})$ for each particle, $i = 1,...,N$ at each instance of time.

**Exercise:** Estimate the number of atoms, N, in a $1cm^{3}$ block of iron. With mass density  $\rho = 7. 87g/cm^{3}$ and atomic mass $m_{0}= 00. 845 \mu$.

**Answer:**  The block had a volume of one cubic cm, the total mass of the blocks $m = \rho V$. One atom weighs, on  average $m_{0}$, so the total number of atoms is

$$N = \frac{M}{m_{0}}= \frac{\rho V}{m_{0}}$$

Solving that many equation, or specifying the initial conditions, or even storing the outcome, is impossible practically speaking. However, it is also absolutely unnecessary:

Thermodynamic systems consist of a very, very large number of particles N. Experiments performed on macroscopic length and time scales are dominated by the collective behavior of particles, not individual particles. These systems are, therefore, described by a small number of *thermodynamic variables*. We new discuss the most important thermodynamic variables and how they can be measured.

**Volume:** $(V)$. The volume is simply the interior volume of the can container that contains the thermodynamic system. If the linear extensions of the system are $L_{x},\; L_{y},\; L_{z}$ in the $x, y, z$ directions, then $V = L_{x}L_{y}L_{z}$. If $L_{z}$ is changed by an infinitesimal amount $dL_{z}$, then this corresponds to a change in volume

$$V \rightarrow V + dV$$

With

$$dV = L_{x}L_{y}dL_{z}= L_{x}L_{y}L_{z}\frac{dL_{z}}{L_{z}}= V \frac{dL_{z}}{L_{z}}.$$

Note that on the right side it does not matter whether we insert the original volume $(V)$ or the new volume $(V + dV)$, because the rules of differential calculus imply

$$dVdL_{z}\approx0$$

To leading order. The SI unit for volume is $m^{3}$,or the liter,

$$1l = 1dm^{3}.$$

Remember that 1 liter of water almost weighs 1 kilogram. 1 quart is also roughly the same as one liter. Another common measure is the gallon, which is about 4.51l, if we're talking Canadian or UK, or 3.81 liter if we're talking US. To measure the volume of a liquid, one pours it into a container of known linear extensions such as a measuring jug. To measure the volume of an unusually shaped object (like, say, a rock), one can just place it in water, and measure the total amount of water displaced. Measuring the volume of a gas is a little more tricky, as gases are compressible, i.e. their volume can change due to temperature and pressure. For a gas inside a container of known volume $V$, one must also measure its temperature and pressure.

**Particle Number:** $N$. The particle number $N$ remains constant in many elementary thermodynamic processes. $N$ is a dimensionless number, but chemists like to use a standard unit of particle number, called the mole.

A mole consists of $N_{A}=6.022 \times 10^{23}$ particles. The number of moles $\nu$ is given by

$$\nu =\frac{N}{N_{A}}.$$

Oftentimes $\nu$ is denoted $n$. But in this lecture we will use $n$ to denote the *particle number density*

$$n = \frac{N}{V}.$$

Moles are not very handy for physicists. It'll be much easier for us to work straight with $N$. Notice that the unwieldy atomic mass unit $u = 1.66 \times 10^{-27}$corresponds exactly to mass per mole ratio of one. The hardly unintuitive molar mass of iron, $m_{0}= 55.845u$ is the same as saying that iron has a particle number density of $55.845g/ \text{mol}$. For a thermodynamic system that consists of one chemical compound with mass $m_{0}$, the total mass of the system is

$$M = N m_{0},$$

and the mass density is given by

$$\rho = \frac{M}{V}= m_{0}n.$$

The total mass $M$ of a system can be measured with a scale. This allows us to measure the particle number if $m_{0}$ is known.

**Pressure:** $P$. The pressure is defined quite simply as

$$P = \frac{\text{Force}}{\text{Area}}.$$

We can measure pressure at any point inside the thermodynamic system. When we measure the pressure at the boundary, $P$ measures the pressure exerted by the system on the system's walls. When measuring pressure inside the container, one should think of a small planar element of area $A$. The force exerted by the system onto this area from one side (which is equal and opposite to the other side), is related by the formula above. Constant pressure means that the amount of force increases linearly with area.

A pressure measurement tool is called a *manometer* or a *barometer*. The SI unit of pressure is the Pascal,

$$1Pa = \frac{N}{m^{2}}$$

Standard atmospheric pressure is

$$1atm = 101.325kPa,$$

Which is the earth's average pressure at sea level. Another popular unit is the bar, $1 bar = 100kPa$. Other units include the Torr and psi.

$1psi = 7kPa$

**Temperature:** $T.$ Temperature is the most interesting variable here. In the kinetic picture, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of particles, basically the formula

$$\langle E \rangle = \frac{3}{2}Nk_{B}T.$$

However, the property "temperature" of a system can be defined purely thermodynamically, through the experimentally confirmed zeroth law of thermodynamics (later). For now, we take for granted that there exist thermometers, which are devices that, when brought into contact with a thermodynamic system, display an empirical temperature $\vartheta$. For example, a Mercury thermometer displays $\vartheta$ through the thermal expansion of a Mercury column.

A gas thermometer measures the temperature $T$ via the variation of volume are pressure of a gas. Any two thermometers can be calibrated with each other to determine the function $\vartheta(T)$. We call $T$ the absolute temperature.

The absolute temperature $T$ is measured in the SI unit Kelvin. Note that we don't write, or say, "degrees Kelvin".

Temperature differences $\Delta T = T_{2}-T_{1}$, in $K$ are identical when expressed in Celsius.

These $6N$ positions and velocities of all particles in a system determine its dynamical state. The knowledge of the thermodynamic variables of a macroscopic system is by no means sufficient to determine its dynamical state. For any choice of admissible thermodynamic variables, there is an infinite number of states of atomic are molecular motion that correspond to it, during macroscopic time scales, the system rapidly passes through many of these corresponding dynamical states, while leaving the thermodynamic variables constant.