# Equation of State

So far, we did not say which external condition needs to exchanged to specifically modify the pressure. The answer is simple: there is none. The pressure can only be changed indirectly through $T, N, V$.

Consider first a homogeneous system with thermodynamic variables $n = \frac{N}{V}, P, T$ which can be defined locally. There exists a relation called the *equation of state* that relates these variables according to

$$\phi (n, P, T)= 0.$$

Let us give some meaningful examples first:

 1. Almost all gases at low pressures and sufficiently far above the condensation temperature are described about the **ideal gas equation of state** $$PV = Nk_{B}T$$ with Boltzman's constant $k_{b}= 1.381 \times 10^{-23}J/K$. In this example, we have $$\phi (n, P, T)= P-nk_{B}T.$$
 2. When temperature and pressure of a gas are such that a real gas is near condensation, deviations from the ideal gas law are observed. A good phenomenological model is then given by the **Van-der-Waals equation of state** $$P = \frac{Nk_{B}T}{v-bN}-\frac{aN^{2}}{V^{2}}$$ $$=  \frac{nk_{b}T}{1-bn}-an^{2}$$ where $a, b$ are parameters specific to the gas under consideration.

Comments:

- Thermodynamics is a set of  general rules and formulas. The equation of state is the *only* point where we specify what substance we are actually dealing with
-  We always assume that we can solve the equation $\phi (n, P, T)= 0$ to express any of the three variables $n, P, T$ as a function of the remaining two variables. Only two of the variables  $n, P, T$ are independent.
- The equation of state has been measured for many substances and is stored in databases. Explicit formulas for $\phi$ exist only in a few cases. Calculation of the equation of state is one of the subjects of statistical mechanics and quantum field theory.
- Often, it is assumed that $N$ is constant and the equation of state is then written as $$\psi (P, V, T)= 0.$$  For instance, $\psi (P, V, T)= PV-Nk_{B}T$ for ideal gases. For fixed $N$, the thermodynamic state is uniquely determined by any two of the variables $P, V, T$.
- There is only one equation of state per substance!

Consider now a macroscopic system in a general thermodynamic state, i.e. it is characterized by local thermodynamic variables $n   (\mathbf{x}), \; P (\mathbf{x}), \; T (\mathbf{x})$. Then at each $\mathbf{x}$ there is a "local equation of state"

$$\phi (n, P, T)= 0$$

Crucially, the function $\phi$ is always the same, it does not depend on $\mathbf{x}$ itself. The $\mathbf{x}$ dependence is only through the arguments.

For an ideal gas, we can write

$$PV = Nk_{B}T= \frac{N}{N_{A}}N_{A}k_{B}T = \nu RT$$

With universal gas constant

$$R = N_{A}k_{B}= 8.314J/K \cdot \text{mol}.$$

