# Extensive and Intensive Variables

The concept of extensive and intensive variables is very simple, bet extremely important and powerful.

Consider a homogeneous thermodynamic system and call it $\mathcal{S}$ described by the thermodynamic variables $(V, N, P, T)$. Now imagine we would duplicate the system and consider the doubled system as a new thermodynamic system $\mathcal{S}'$ itself. The volume and particle number of $\mathcal{S}'$ will be twice that of $\mathcal{S}$.

The pressure and temperature, however, remain the same regardless of the spatial extent of the system. Hence

$$\begin{align}
T' &= T, \\
P' &= P
\end{align}
$$

Similarly, the particle number density $n = N/V$ remains the same.

A thermodynamic quantity that doubles during an imagined doubling of a homogeneous system is called **extensive**. Example are $V$ and $N$. A quantity that remains invariant under this doubling is called **intensive**. Examples are $P, T$, and $n$. The ratio of two extensive quantities is intensive, as is the case for $n = N/V$.

Intensive quantities are usually local quantities such as densities. For instance, the total mass of a system $M = m_{0}N$, is an extensive quantity, but the mass density is an intensive quantity.

The mass per particle, as a ratio of two extensive variables, is also intensive.

If the left-hand side of an equation is extensive (or intensive), the right-hand side of the equation must also be extensive (or intensive). For instance, for an ideal gas, we have

$$PV = Nk_{B}T\; \text{(extensive = extensive)}$$

$$P = nk_{B}T \:\text{(intensive = intensive)}.$$

If you are uncomfortable with doubling a given system $\mathcal{S}$, you may alternatively divide the system into two macroscopic pieces, $\mathcal{S}= \mathcal{S}_{1}\cup \mathcal{S}_{2}$, by inserting an additional wall.

Extensive quantities then