# Thermodynamic Processes and Work

Consider a homogeneous system in a thermodynamic state with fixed $N$ and equation of state

$$\psi (P, V, T)= 0$$

Choose $P, V$ as independent variables. It is often useful to represent them in a $PV-$ diagram, with $P$ on the $y-$axis and $V$ on the $x-$axis. Any point in the $PV-$diagram defines a state of the system.

The temperature $T (P, V)$ is a function of $P, V$. Points representing states of equal temperature lie on a curve which is called an *isotherm*.

**Example:** consider an ideal gas with $PV = Nk_{B}T$. For fixed $N$ we have

$$T = T (P, V)= \frac{PV}{Nk_{B}}.$$

Isothermal curves in the $PV-$diagram correspond to

$$P = \frac{Nk_{B}T}{V}= \frac{\text{const}}{V}$$

They are hyperbolas having the $P$ and $V$-axes asymptotes.

We define a *thermodynamic transformation or process* as any transformation that brings a system from an initial state to a final state through a continuous succession of intermediate states. If the initial and final states are two points $(V_{1}, P_{1})$ and $(P_{2}, V{2})$ in a $PV$-diagram, then any curve connecting these point corresponds to a possible transformation. They correspond to different ways of modifying the external conditions to get from $1$ to $2$. However, not every transformation connecting $T$ and $2$ is represented by such a curve.

A transformation is said to be *reversible* when the successive states during the process differ  by infinitesimals from equilibrium states. In particular, the initial and final states of a reversible transformation need to be states of equilibrium.

If the intermediate states are not equilibrium states, then they're typically inhomogeneous, and so can't we drawn in a $PV$-diagram.

We revisit the example of isothermal expansion here. We define a heat bath, or heat reservoir as an environment of temperature $T$ that contains so many particles this its temperature does not change when it is in thermal contact with a (smaller) system.

## Isothermal expansion (Irreversible Curve)

1. Consider a gas inside a container with immovable walls of volume $2V$ coupled to a heat bath of temperature $T$, so that the system temperature remains constant
2. Initially, at time $t \leq 0$, a wall separates the left and right hand sides of the container. An ideal gas of $N$ molecules in the equilibrium state $(P_{i}, V, T)$ occupies the left half. Its pressure is $P_{i}= Nk_{B}T/V$.
3.  At time $t = 0$, the separating wall is removed.
4.  For time  $t >0$, the volume of the system is now in a non-equilibrium state, having too high pressure on the left half, while having almost no pressure on the right half. Rapid macroscopic motions set in to diminish this pressure gradient, creating macroscopic currents of gas. The temperature stays constant do you to the coupling to the bath.
5.  After a sufficiently long time, the gas reaches the final equilibrium state $(P_{f}, 2V, T)$ with pressure $$P_{f}= \frac{Nk_{B}T}{2V}= \frac{P_{i}}{2}$$

## Reversible Isothermal Expansion

1. Consider a gas inside a container with a piston, otherwise same setup.
2. As before,
3.   Remove wall (kinda)
4.  For $t > 0$, we *slowly* move the piston back, moving the wall to the right. This keeps the system infinitesimally close to equilibrium. The volume is $V < V (t)< 2V$, and pressure $P_{i}> P (t)> P_{f}$.
5. The gas reaches an equilibrium state after a sufficiently long time. But this time we have a curve that takes us from the initial state to the final state. If we recorded a video, we would not be able to tell which way is forward in time. It is in this sense that we say the process is reversible.

During a transformation, a system can perform positive or negative work ; that is, the system can do work on its surroundings, or surroundings can do work on the system. As an example, we consider a fluid enclosed in a cylinder having a moveable piston of area $S$ on one end. If $P$ is the pressure of the fluid against the walls of the cylinder, they $F = PS$ is the force exerted by the fluid onto the piston. If the piston is shifted by an infinitesimal distance $dh$, then an infinitesimal amount of work done $dl= Fdh= PSdh$ is performed, since the displacement is parallel to the force. But $Sdh$ is equal to the increase of the volume of the system, $dV$. Thus, we may write

$dL = PdV$

For a finite transformation, the  work done by the system is obtained by integrating this equation,

$$L = \int_{V_{1}}^{V_{2}}PdV.$$

Here, $1$ and $2$ are the initial and final states of the transformation.